   
Baseball


From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



This article is about the sport. For the ball used in the sport, see Baseball 
(ball). For other uses, see Baseball (disambiguation).

"Base ball" redirects here. For old time baseball, see Vintage base ball.



game



  Baseball


      A baseball game at Angel Stadium in Anaheim, California, United States


    Highest governing body
      World Baseball Softball Confederation

    First played
      18th-century England

    Characteristics


    Contact
      Limited

    Team members
      9

    Mixed gender
      Yes, separate competitions

    Type
      Team sport, bat-and-ball

    Equipment
      Baseball 
      Baseball bat 
      Baseball glove 
      Bases

    Venue
      Baseball field

    Glossary
      Glossary of baseball

    Presence


    Country or region
      Worldwide (most prominent in the Americas and East Asia)

    Olympic
      Demonstration sport: 1912, 1936, 1952, 1956, 1964, 1984 and 1988
      Medal sport: 1992–2008, 2020–

    World Games
      1981[1]

Baseball is a bat-and-ball game played between two opposing teams who take turns 
batting and fielding. The game proceeds when a player on the fielding team, 
called the pitcher, throws a ball which a player on the batting team tries to 
hit with a bat. The objectives of the offensive team (batting team) are to hit 
the ball into the field of play, and to run the bases—having its runners advance 
counter-clockwise around four bases to score what are called "runs". The 
objective of the defensive team (fielding team) is to prevent batters from 
becoming runners, and to prevent runners' advance around the bases.[2] A run is 
scored when a runner legally advances around the bases in order and touches home 
plate (the place where the player started as a batter). The team that scores the 
most runs by the end of the game is the winner. 

The first objective of the batting team is to have a player reach first base 
safely. A player on the batting team who reaches first base without being called 
"out" can attempt to advance to subsequent bases as a runner, either immediately 
or during teammates' turns batting. The fielding team tries to prevent runs by 
getting batters or runners "out", which forces them out of the field of play. 
Both the pitcher and fielders have methods of getting the batting team's players 
out. The opposing teams switch back and forth between batting and fielding; the 
batting team's turn to bat is over once the fielding team records three outs. 
One turn batting for each team constitutes an inning. A game is usually composed 
of nine innings, and the team with the greater number of runs at the end of the 
game wins. If scores are tied at the end of nine innings, extra innings are 
usually played. Baseball has no game clock, although most games end in the ninth 
inning. 

Baseball evolved from older bat-and-ball games already being played in England 
by the mid-18th century. This game was brought by immigrants to North America, 
where the modern version developed. By the late 19th century, baseball was 
widely recognized as the national sport of the United States. Baseball is 
popular in North America and parts of Central and South America, the Caribbean, 
and East Asia, particularly in Japan and South Korea. 

In the United States and Canada, professional Major League Baseball (MLB) teams 
are divided into the National League (NL) and American League (AL), each with 
three divisions: East, West, and Central. The MLB champion is determined by 
playoffs that culminate in the World Series. The top level of play is similarly 
split in Japan between the Central and Pacific Leagues and in Cuba between the 
West League and East League. The World Baseball Classic, organized by the World 
Baseball Softball Confederation, is the major international competition of the 
sport and attracts the top national teams from around the world. 



Diagram of a baseball field (the term diamond may be used to refer to the square 
area defined by the four bases or to the entire playing field). The dimensions 
given are for professional and professional-style games. Children often play on 
smaller fields.
A baseball game is played between two teams, each composed of nine players, that 
take turns playing offense (batting and baserunning) and defense (pitching and 
fielding). A pair of turns, one at bat and one in the field, by each team 
constitutes an inning. A game consists of nine innings (seven innings at the 
high school level and in doubleheaders in college and minor leagues, and six 
innings at the Little League level).[3] One team—customarily the visiting 
team—bats in the top, or first half, of every inning. The other team—customarily 
the home team—bats in the bottom, or second half, of every inning. The goal of 
the game is to score more points (runs) than the other team. The players on the 
team at bat attempt to score runs by circling or completing a tour of the four 
bases set at the corners of the square-shaped baseball diamond. A player bats at 
home plate and must proceed counterclockwise to first base, second base, third 
base, and back home to score a run. The team in the field attempts to prevent 
runs from scoring and record outs, which remove opposing players from offensive 
action until their turn in their team's batting order comes up again. When three 
outs are recorded, the teams switch roles for the next half-inning. If the score 
of the game is tied after nine innings, extra innings are played to resolve the 
contest. Many amateur games, particularly unorganized ones, involve different 
numbers of players and innings.[4] 

The game is played on a field whose primary boundaries, the foul lines, extend 
forward from home plate at 45-degree angles. The 90-degree area within the foul 
lines is referred to as fair territory; the 270-degree area outside them is foul 
territory. The part of the field enclosed by the bases and several yards beyond 
them is the infield; the area farther beyond the infield is the outfield. In the 
middle of the infield is a raised pitcher's mound, with a rectangular rubber 
plate (the rubber) at its center. The outer boundary of the outfield is 
typically demarcated by a raised fence, which may be of any material and height. 
The fair territory between home plate and the outfield boundary is baseball's 
field of play, though significant events can take place in foul territory, as 
well.[5] 

There are three basic tools of baseball: the ball, the bat, and the glove or 
mitt: 
  The baseball is about the size of an adult's fist, around 9 inches (23 
  centimeters) in circumference. It has a rubber or cork center, wound in yarn 
  and covered in white cowhide, with red stitching.[6]
  The bat is a hitting tool, traditionally made of a single, solid piece of 
  wood. Other materials are now commonly used for nonprofessional games. It is a 
  hard round stick, about 2.5 inches (6.4 centimeters) in diameter at the 
  hitting end, tapering to a narrower handle and culminating in a knob. Bats 
  used by adults are typically around 34 inches (86 centimeters) long, and not 
  longer than 42 inches (106 centimeters).[7]
  The glove or mitt is a fielding tool, made of padded leather with webbing 
  between the fingers. As an aid in catching and holding onto the ball, it takes 
  various shapes to meet the specific needs of different fielding positions.[8]

Protective helmets are also standard equipment for all batters.[9] 

At the beginning of each half-inning, the nine players on the fielding team 
arrange themselves around the field. One of them, the pitcher, stands on the 
pitcher's mound. The pitcher begins the pitching delivery with one foot on the 
rubber, pushing off it to gain velocity when throwing toward home plate. Another 
player, the catcher, squats on the far side of home plate, facing the pitcher. 
The rest of the team faces home plate, typically arranged as four infielders—who 
set up along or within a few yards outside the imaginary lines (basepaths) 
between first, second, and third base—and three outfielders. In the standard 
arrangement, there is a first baseman positioned several steps to the left of 
first base, a second baseman to the right of second base, a shortstop to the 
left of second base, and a third baseman to the right of third base. The basic 
outfield positions are left fielder, center fielder, and right fielder. With the 
exception of the catcher, all fielders are required to be in fair territory when 
the pitch is delivered. A neutral umpire sets up behind the catcher.[10] Other 
umpires will be distributed around the field as well.[11] 


 


David Ortiz, the batter, awaiting a pitch, with the catcher and umpire
Play starts with a batter standing at home plate, holding a bat.[12] The batter 
waits for the pitcher to throw a pitch (the ball) toward home plate, and 
attempts to hit the ball[13] with the bat.[12] The catcher catches pitches that 
the batter does not hit—as a result of either electing not to swing or failing 
to connect—and returns them to the pitcher. A batter who hits the ball into the 
field of play must drop the bat and begin running toward first base, at which 
point the player is referred to as a runner (or, until the play is over, a 
batter-runner). A batter-runner who reaches first base without being put out is 
said to be safe and is on base. A batter-runner may choose to remain at first 
base or attempt to advance to second base or even beyond—however far the player 
believes can be reached safely. A player who reaches base despite proper play by 
the fielders has recorded a hit. A player who reaches first base safely on a hit 
is credited with a single. If a player makes it to second base safely as a 
direct result of a hit, it is a double; third base, a triple. If the ball is hit 
in the air within the foul lines over the entire outfield (and outfield fence, 
if there is one), or otherwise safely circles all the bases, it is a home run: 
the batter and any runners on base may all freely circle the bases, each scoring 
a run. This is the most desirable result for the batter. A player who reaches 
base due to a fielding mistake is not credited with a hit—instead, the 
responsible fielder is charged with an error.[12] 

Any runners already on base may attempt to advance on batted balls that land, or 
contact the ground, in fair territory, before or after the ball lands. A runner 
on first base must attempt to advance if a ball lands in play. If a ball hit 
into play rolls foul before passing through the infield, it becomes dead and any 
runners must return to the base they occupied when the play began. If the ball 
is hit in the air and caught before it lands, the batter has flied out and any 
runners on base may attempt to advance only if they tag up (contact the base 
they occupied when the play began, as or after the ball is caught). Runners may 
also attempt to advance to the next base while the pitcher is in the process of 
delivering the ball to home plate; a successful effort is a stolen base.[14] 

A pitch that is not hit into the field of play is called either a strike or a 
ball. A batter against whom three strikes are recorded strikes out. A batter 
against whom four balls are recorded is awarded a base on balls or walk, a free 
advance to first base. (A batter may also freely advance to first base if the 
batter's body or uniform is struck by a pitch outside the strike zone, provided 
the batter does not swing and attempts to avoid being hit.)[15] Crucial to 
determining balls and strikes is the umpire's judgment as to whether a pitch has 
passed through the strike zone, a conceptual area above home plate extending 
from the midpoint between the batter's shoulders and belt down to the hollow of 
the knee.[16] 


 


A shortstop tries to tag out a runner who is sliding headfirst, attempting to 
reach second base.
While the team at bat is trying to score runs, the team in the field is 
attempting to record outs. In addition to the strikeout, common ways a member of 
the batting team may be put out include the flyout, ground out, force out, and 
tag out. It is possible to record two outs in the course of the same play. This 
is called a double play. Three outs in one play, a triple play, is possible, 
though rare. Players put out or retired must leave the field, returning to their 
team's dugout or bench. A runner may be stranded on base when a third out is 
recorded against another player on the team. Stranded runners do not benefit the 
team in its next turn at bat as every half-inning begins with the bases 
empty.[17] 

An individual player's turn batting or plate appearance is complete when the 
player reaches base, hits a home run, makes an out, or hits a ball that results 
in the team's third out, even if it is recorded against a teammate. On rare 
occasions, a batter may be at the plate when, without the batter's hitting the 
ball, a third out is recorded against a teammate—for instance, a runner getting 
caught stealing (tagged out attempting to steal a base). A batter with this sort 
of incomplete plate appearance starts off the team's next turn batting; any 
balls or strikes recorded against the batter the previous inning are erased. A 
runner may circle the bases only once per plate appearance and thus can score at 
most a single run per batting turn. Once a player has completed a plate 
appearance, that player may not bat again until the eight other members of the 
player's team have all taken their turn at bat. The batting order is set before 
the game begins, and may not be altered except for substitutions. Once a player 
has been removed for a substitute, that player may not reenter the game. 
Children's games often have more liberal substitution rules.[18] 

If the designated hitter (DH) rule is in effect, each team has a tenth player 
whose sole responsibility is to bat (and run). The DH takes the place of another 
player—almost invariably the pitcher—in the batting order, but does not field. 
Thus, even with the DH, each team still has a batting order of nine players and 
a fielding arrangement of nine players.[19] 

Personnel

See also: Baseball positions

Players


 


Defensive positions on a baseball field, with abbreviations and scorekeeper's 
position numbers (not uniform numbers)
See also: the categories Baseball players and Lists of baseball players.

The number of players on a baseball roster, or squad, varies by league and by 
the level of organized play. A Major League Baseball (MLB) team has a roster of 
25 players with specific roles. A typical roster features the following 
players:[20] 
  Eight position players: the catcher, four infielders, and three 
  outfielders—all of whom play on a regular basis
  Five starting pitchers who constitute the team's pitching rotation or starting 
  rotation
  Six relief pitchers, including one closer, who constitute the team's bullpen 
  (named for the off-field area where pitchers warm up)
  One backup, or substitute, catcher
  Two backup infielders
  Two backup outfielders
  One pinch hitter, or a second backup catcher, or a seventh reliever

Most baseball leagues worldwide have the DH rule, including MLB's American 
League, Japan's Pacific League, and Caribbean professional leagues, along with 
major American amateur organizations.[21] The Central League in Japan and the 
National League do not have the rule, and high-level minor league clubs 
connected to National League teams are not required to field a DH.[22] In 
leagues that apply the designated hitter rule, a typical team has nine offensive 
regulars (including the DH), five starting pitchers,[23] seven or eight 
relievers, a backup catcher, and two or three other reserve players.[24][25] 

Other

The manager, or head coach, oversees the team's major strategic decisions, such 
as establishing the starting rotation, setting the lineup, or batting order, 
before each game, and making substitutions during games—in particular, bringing 
in relief pitchers. Managers are typically assisted by two or more coaches; they 
may have specialized responsibilities, such as working with players on hitting, 
fielding, pitching, or strength and conditioning. At most levels of organized 
play, two coaches are stationed on the field when the team is at bat: the first 
base coach and third base coach, occupying designated coaches' boxes just 
outside the foul lines, assist in the direction of baserunners when the ball is 
in play, and relay tactical signals from the manager to batters and runners 
during pauses in play.[26] In contrast to many other team sports, baseball 
managers and coaches generally wear their team's uniforms; coaches must be in 
uniform to be allowed on the field to confer with players during a game.[27] 

Any baseball game involves one or more umpires, who make rulings on the outcome 
of each play. At a minimum, one umpire will stand behind the catcher, to have a 
good view of the strike zone, and call balls and strikes. Additional umpires may 
be stationed near the other bases, thus making it easier to judge plays such as 
attempted force outs and tag outs. In MLB, four umpires are used for each game, 
one near each base. In the playoffs, six umpires are used: one at each base and 
two in the outfield along the foul lines.[28] 

Strategy and tactics

See also: Baseball positioning

Many of the pre-game and in-game strategic decisions in baseball revolve around 
a fundamental fact: in general, right-handed batters tend to be more successful 
against left-handed pitchers and, to an even greater degree, left-handed batters 
tend to be more successful against right-handed pitchers.[29] A manager with 
several left-handed batters in the regular lineup who knows the team will be 
facing a left-handed starting pitcher may respond by starting one or more of the 
right-handed backups on the team's roster. During the late innings of a game, as 
relief pitchers and pinch hitters are brought in, the opposing managers will 
often go back and forth trying to create favorable matchups with their 
substitutions: the manager of the fielding team trying to arrange same-handed 
pitcher-batter matchups, the manager of the batting team trying to arrange 
opposite-handed matchups. With a team that has the lead in the late innings, a 
manager may remove a starting position player—especially one whose turn at bat 
is not likely to come up again—for a more skillful fielder.[30] 

Pitching and fielding tactics


 


A first baseman receives a pickoff throw, as the runner dives back to first 
base.
The tactical decision that precedes almost every play in a baseball game 
involves pitch selection.[31] By gripping and then releasing the baseball in a 
certain manner, and by throwing it at a certain speed, pitchers can cause the 
baseball to break to either side, or downward, as it approaches the batter.[32] 
Among the resulting wide variety of pitches that may be thrown, the four basic 
types are the fastball, the changeup (or off-speed pitch), and two breaking 
balls—the curveball and the slider.[33] Pitchers have different repertoires of 
pitches they are skillful at throwing. Conventionally, before each pitch, the 
catcher signals the pitcher what type of pitch to throw, as well as its general 
vertical and/or horizontal location.[34] If there is disagreement on the 
selection, the pitcher may shake off the sign and the catcher will call for a 
different pitch. With a runner on base and taking a lead, the pitcher may 
attempt a pickoff, a quick throw to a fielder covering the base to keep the 
runner's lead in check or, optimally, effect a tag out.[35] Pickoff attempts, 
however, are subject to rules that severely restrict the pitcher's movements 
before and during the pickoff attempt. Violation of any one of these rules could 
result in the umpire calling a balk against the pitcher, which permits any 
runners on base to advance one base with impunity.[36] If an attempted stolen 
base is anticipated, the catcher may call for a pitchout, a ball thrown 
deliberately off the plate, allowing the catcher to catch it while standing and 
throw quickly to a base.[37] Facing a batter with a strong tendency to hit to 
one side of the field, the fielding team may employ a shift, with most or all of 
the fielders moving to the left or right of their usual positions. With a runner 
on third base, the infielders may play in, moving closer to home plate to 
improve the odds of throwing out the runner on a ground ball, though a sharply 
hit grounder is more likely to carry through a drawn-in infield.[38] 

Batting and baserunning tactics

Several basic offensive tactics come into play with a runner on first base, 
including the fundamental choice of whether to attempt a steal of second base. 
The hit and run is sometimes employed with a skillful contact hitter: the runner 
takes off with the pitch drawing the shortstop or second baseman over to second 
base, creating a gap in the infield for the batter to poke the ball through.[39] 
The sacrifice bunt calls for the batter to focus on making contact with the ball 
so that it rolls a short distance into the infield, allowing the runner to 
advance into scoring position even at the expense of the batter being thrown out 
at first—a batter who succeeds is credited with a sacrifice. (A batter, 
particularly one who is a fast runner, may also attempt to bunt for a hit.) A 
sacrifice bunt employed with a runner on third base, aimed at bringing that 
runner home, is known as a squeeze play.[40] With a runner on third and fewer 
than two outs, a batter may instead concentrate on hitting a fly ball that, even 
if it is caught, will be deep enough to allow the runner to tag up and score—a 
successful batter, in this case, gets credit for a sacrifice fly.[38] The 
manager will sometimes signal a batter who is ahead in the count (i.e., has more 
balls than strikes) to take, or not swing at, the next pitch.[41] 

History

Main article: History of baseball

Further information: Origins of baseball

      Part of a series on the

    History of baseball

        Origins
         Early years
         Knickerbocker Rules
         The Massachusetts Game
         Philadelphia town ball
         Alexander Cartwright
         Doc Adams
         Doubleday myth
         First league
         First pro team
         First pro league
         Team nicknames


    By country

        United States
        Outside the United States
        Australia
         Canada
         Cuba
         Germany
         Greece
         India
         Ireland
         Israel
         Japan
         South Korea
         Netherlands
         Nicaragua
         Palau
         Philippines
         Puerto Rico
         Spain
         United Kingdom
         Venezuela


    Other topics

        Negro league baseball
         Cuban League
         Women in baseball
         Minor League Baseball
         Comparison with cricket
         Baseball (TV documentary series)
         Baseball Hall of Fame
         Society for American Baseball Research
         Years in baseball
         Major League Baseball seasons


    Related games

        Stoolball
         Rounders
         Old cat
         Softball
         Pesäpallo

      Baseball portal
        v
        t
        e


The evolution of baseball from older bat-and-ball games is difficult to trace 
with precision. Consensus once held that today's baseball is a North American 
development from the older game rounders, popular among children in Great 
Britain and Ireland.[42][43] Baseball Before We Knew It: A Search for the Roots 
of the Game (2005), by American baseball historian David Block, suggests that 
the game originated in England; recently uncovered historical evidence supports 
this position. Block argues that rounders and early baseball were actually 
regional variants of each other, and that the game's most direct antecedents are 
the English games of stoolball and "tut-ball".[44] The earliest known reference 
to baseball is in a 1744 British publication, A Little Pretty Pocket-Book, by 
John Newbery.[45] Block discovered that the first recorded game of "Bass-Ball" 
took place in 1749 in Surrey, and featured the Prince of Wales as a player.[46] 
This early form of the game was apparently brought to Canada by English 
immigrants.[47] 

By the early 1830s, there were reports of a variety of uncodified bat-and-ball 
games recognizable as early forms of baseball being played around North 
America.[48] In 1845, Alexander Cartwright, a member of New York City's 
Knickerbocker Club, led the codification of the so-called Knickerbocker 
Rules.[49] While there are reports that the New York Knickerbockers played games 
in 1845, the contest long recognized as the first officially recorded baseball 
game in U.S. history took place on June 19, 1846, in Hoboken, New Jersey: the 
"New York Nine" defeated the Knickerbockers, 23–1, in four innings.[50] With the 
Knickerbocker code as the basis, the rules of modern baseball continued to 
evolve over the next half-century.[51] 

In the United States

Further information: Baseball in the United States and History of baseball in 
the United States

Establishment of professional leagues

In the mid-1850s, a baseball craze hit the New York metropolitan area,[52] and 
by 1856, local journals were referring to baseball as the "national pastime" or 
"national game".[53] A year later, the sport's first governing body, the 
National Association of Base Ball Players, was formed. In 1867, it barred 
participation by African Americans.[54] The more formally structured National 
League was founded in 1876.[55] Professional Negro leagues formed, but quickly 
folded.[56] In 1887, softball, under the name of indoor baseball or 
indoor-outdoor, was invented as a winter version of the parent game.[57] The 
National League's first successful counterpart, the American League, which 
evolved from the minor Western League, was established in 1893, and virtually 
all of the modern baseball rules were in place by then.[58][59] 

The National Agreement of 1903 formalized relations both between the two major 
leagues and between them and the National Association of Professional Base Ball 
Leagues, representing most of the country's minor professional leagues.[60] The 
World Series, pitting the two major league champions against each other, was 
inaugurated that fall.[61] The Black Sox Scandal of the 1919 World Series led to 
the formation of a new National Commission of baseball that drew the two major 
leagues closer together.[62] The first major league baseball commissioner, 
Kenesaw Mountain Landis, was elected in 1920. That year also saw the founding of 
the Negro National League; the first significant Negro league, it would operate 
until 1931. For part of the 1920s, it was joined by the Eastern Colored 
League.[63] 

Rise of Ruth and racial integration

Compared with the present, professional baseball in the early 20th century was 
lower-scoring, and pitchers were more dominant.[64] The so-called dead-ball era 
ended in the early 1920s with several changes in rule and circumstance that were 
advantageous to hitters. Strict new regulations governed the ball's size, shape 
and composition, along with a new rule officially banning the spitball and other 
pitches that depended on the ball being treated or roughed-up with foreign 
substances, resulted in a ball that traveled farther when hit.[65] The rise of 
the legendary player Babe Ruth, the first great power hitter of the new era, 
helped permanently alter the nature of the game.[66] In the late 1920s and early 
1930s, St. Louis Cardinals general manager Branch Rickey invested in several 
minor league clubs and developed the first modern farm system.[67] A new Negro 
National League was organized in 1933; four years later, it was joined by the 
Negro American League. The first elections to the National Baseball Hall of Fame 
took place in 1936. In 1939, Little League Baseball was founded in 
Pennsylvania.[68] 


 


Jackie Robinson in 1945, with the era's Kansas City Royals, a barnstorming squad 
associated with the Negro American League's Kansas City Monarchs
A large number of minor league teams disbanded when World War II led to a player 
shortage. Chicago Cubs owner Philip K. Wrigley led the formation of the 
All-American Girls Professional Baseball League to help keep the game in the 
public eye.[69] The first crack in the unwritten agreement barring blacks from 
white-controlled professional ball occurred in 1945: Jackie Robinson was signed 
by the National League's Brooklyn Dodgers and began playing for their minor 
league team in Montreal.[70] In 1947, Robinson broke the major leagues' color 
barrier when he debuted with the Dodgers.[71] Latin American players, largely 
overlooked before, also started entering the majors in greater numbers. In 1951, 
two Chicago White Sox, Venezuelan-born Chico Carrasquel and black Cuban-born 
Minnie Miñoso, became the first Hispanic All-Stars.[72][73] Integration 
proceeded slowly: by 1953, only six of the 16 major league teams had a black 
player on the roster.[72] 

Attendance records and the age of steroids

In 1975, the union's power—and players' salaries—began to increase greatly when 
the reserve clause was effectively struck down, leading to the free agency 
system.[74] Significant work stoppages occurred in 1981 and 1994, the latter 
forcing the cancellation of the World Series for the first time in 90 years.[75] 
Attendance had been growing steadily since the mid-1970s and in 1994, before the 
stoppage, the majors were setting their all-time record for per-game 
attendance.[76][77] After play resumed in 1995, non-division-winning wild card 
teams became a permanent fixture of the post-season. Regular-season interleague 
play was introduced in 1997 and the second-highest attendance mark for a full 
season was set.[78] In 2000, the National and American Leagues were dissolved as 
legal entities. While their identities were maintained for scheduling purposes 
(and the designated hitter distinction), the regulations and other 
functions—such as player discipline and umpire supervision—they had administered 
separately were consolidated under the rubric of MLB.[79] 

In 2001, Barry Bonds established the current record of 73 home runs in a single 
season. There had long been suspicions that the dramatic increase in power 
hitting was fueled in large part by the abuse of illegal steroids (as well as by 
the dilution of pitching talent due to expansion), but the issue only began 
attracting significant media attention in 2002 and there was no penalty for the 
use of performance-enhancing drugs before 2004.[80] In 2007, Bonds became MLB's 
all-time home run leader, surpassing Hank Aaron, as total major league and minor 
league attendance both reached all-time highs.[81][82] 

Around the world

Main article: History of baseball

Widely known as America's pastime, baseball is well established in several other 
countries as well. As early as 1877, a professional league, the International 
Association, featured teams from both Canada and the US.[83] While baseball is 
widely played in Canada and many minor league teams have been based in the 
country,[84][85] the American major leagues did not include a Canadian club 
until 1969, when the Montreal Expos joined the National League as an expansion 
team. In 1977, the expansion Toronto Blue Jays joined the American League.[86] 


 


Sadaharu Oh managing the Japan national team in the 2006 World Baseball Classic. 
Playing for the Central League's Yomiuri Giants (1959–80), Oh set the 
professional world record for home runs.
In 1847, American soldiers played what may have been the first baseball game in 
Mexico at Parque Los Berros in Xalapa, Veracruz.[87] The first formal baseball 
league outside of the United States and Canada was founded in 1878 in Cuba, 
which maintains a rich baseball tradition. The Dominican Republic held its first 
islandwide championship tournament in 1912.[88] Professional baseball 
tournaments and leagues began to form in other countries between the world wars, 
including the Netherlands (formed in 1922), Australia (1934), Japan (1936), 
Mexico (1937), and Puerto Rico (1938).[89] The Japanese major leagues have long 
been considered the highest quality professional circuits outside of the United 
States.[90] 

After World War II, professional leagues were founded in many Latin American 
countries, most prominently Venezuela (1946) and the Dominican Republic 
(1955).[91] Since the early 1970s, the annual Caribbean Series has matched the 
championship clubs from the four leading Latin American winter leagues: the 
Dominican Professional Baseball League, Mexican Pacific League, Puerto Rican 
Professional Baseball League, and Venezuelan Professional Baseball League. In 
Asia, South Korea (1982), Taiwan (1990) and China (2003) all have professional 
leagues.[92] 

Many European countries have professional leagues as well; the most successful, 
other than the Dutch league, is the Italian league, founded in 1948.[93] In 
2004, Australia won a surprise silver medal at the Olympic Games.[94] The 
Confédération Européene de Baseball (European Baseball Confederation), founded 
in 1953, organizes a number of competitions between clubs from different 
countries. Other competitions between national teams, such as the Baseball World 
Cup and the Olympic baseball tournament, were administered by the International 
Baseball Federation (IBAF) from its formation in 1938 until its 2013 merger with 
the International Softball Federation to create the current joint governing body 
for both sports, the World Baseball Softball Confederation (WBSC).[95] Women's 
baseball is played on an organized amateur basis in numerous countries.[96] 

After being admitted to the Olympics as a medal sport beginning with the 1992 
Games, baseball was dropped from the 2012 Summer Olympic Games at the 2005 
International Olympic Committee meeting. It remained part of the 2008 Games.[97] 
While the sport's lack of a following in much of the world was a factor, more 
important was MLB's reluctance to have a break during the Games to allow its 
players to participate.[98] MLB initiated the World Baseball Classic, scheduled 
to precede the major league season, partly as a replacement, high-profile 
international tournament. The inaugural Classic, held in March 2006, was the 
first tournament involving national teams to feature a significant number of MLB 
participants.[99][100] The Baseball World Cup was discontinued after its 2011 
edition in favor of an expanded World Baseball Classic.[101] 

Distinctive elements

Baseball has certain attributes that set it apart from the other popular team 
sports in the countries where it has a following. All of these sports use a 
clock;[102] in all of them, play is less individual and more collective;[103] 
and in none of them is the variation between playing fields nearly as 
substantial or important.[104] The comparison between cricket and baseball 
demonstrates that many of baseball's distinctive elements are shared in various 
ways with its cousin sports.[105] 

No clock to kill


 


A well-worn baseball
In clock-limited sports, games often end with a team that holds the lead killing 
the clock rather than competing aggressively against the opposing team. In 
contrast, baseball has no clock; a team cannot win without getting the last 
batter out and rallies are not constrained by time. At almost any turn in any 
baseball game, the most advantageous strategy is some form of aggressive 
strategy.[106] In contrast, again, the clock comes into play even in the case of 
multi-day Test and first-class cricket: the possibility of a draw often 
encourages a team that is batting last and well behind to bat defensively, 
giving up any faint chance at a win to avoid a loss.[107] 

While nine innings has been the standard since the beginning of professional 
baseball, the duration of the average major league game has increased steadily 
through the years. At the turn of the 20th century, games typically took an hour 
and a half to play. In the 1920s, they averaged just less than two hours, which 
eventually ballooned to 2:38 in 1960.[108] By 1997, the average American League 
game lasted 2:57 (National League games were about 10 minutes shorter—pitchers 
at the plate making for quicker outs than designated hitters).[109] In 2004, 
Major League Baseball declared that its goal was an average game of 2:45.[108] 
By 2014, though, the average MLB game took over three hours to complete.[110] 
The lengthening of games is attributed to longer breaks between half-innings for 
television commercials, increased offense, more pitching changes, and a slower 
pace of play with pitchers taking more time between each delivery, and batters 
stepping out of the box more frequently.[108][109] Other leagues have 
experienced similar issues. In 2008, Nippon Professional Baseball took steps 
aimed at shortening games by 12 minutes from the preceding decade's average of 
3:18.[111] 

In 2016, the average nine-inning playoff game in Major League baseball was 3 
hours and 35 minutes. This was up 10 minutes from 2015 and 21 minutes from 
2014.[112] 

Individual focus


 


Babe Ruth in 1920, the year he joined the New York Yankees
Although baseball is a team sport, individual players are often placed under 
scrutiny and pressure. In 1915, a baseball instructional manual pointed out that 
every single pitch, of which there are often more than two hundred in a game, 
involves an individual, one-on-one contest: "the pitcher and the batter in a 
battle of wits".[113] Contrasting the game with both football and basketball, 
scholar Michael Mandelbaum argues that "baseball is the one closest in 
evolutionary descent to the older individual sports".[114] Pitcher, batter, and 
fielder all act essentially independent of each other. While coaching staffs can 
signal pitcher or batter to pursue certain tactics, the execution of the play 
itself is a series of solitary acts. If the batter hits a line drive, the 
outfielder is solely responsible for deciding to try to catch it or play it on 
the bounce and for succeeding or failing. The statistical precision of baseball 
is both facilitated by this isolation and reinforces it. As described by 
Mandelbaum, 


It is impossible to isolate and objectively assess the contribution each 
[football] team member makes to the outcome of the play... [E]very basketball 
player is interacting with all of his teammates all the time. In baseball, by 
contrast, every player is more or less on his own... Baseball is therefore a 
realm of complete transparency and total responsibility. A baseball player lives 
in a glass house, and in a stark moral universe... Everything that every player 
does is accounted for and everything accounted for is either good or bad, right 
or wrong.[103]

Cricket is more similar to baseball than many other team sports in this regard: 
while the individual focus in cricket is mitigated by the importance of the 
batting partnership and the practicalities of tandem running, it is enhanced by 
the fact that a batsman may occupy the wicket for an hour or much more. There is 
no statistical equivalent in cricket for the fielding error and thus less 
emphasis on personal responsibility in this area of play.[115] 

Uniqueness of each baseball park

Further information: Baseball park


 


Fenway Park, home of the Boston Red Sox. The Green Monster is visible beyond the 
playing field on the left.
Unlike those of most sports, baseball playing fields can vary significantly in 
size and shape. While the dimensions of the infield are specifically regulated, 
the only constraint on outfield size and shape for professional teams following 
the rules of MLB and Minor League Baseball is that fields built or remodeled 
since June 1, 1958, must have a minimum distance of 325 feet (99 m) from home 
plate to the fences in left and right field and 400 feet (122 m) to center.[116] 
Major league teams often skirt even this rule. For example, at Minute Maid Park, 
which became the home of the Houston Astros in 2000, the Crawford Boxes in left 
field are only 315 feet (96 m) from home plate.[117] There are no rules at all 
that address the height of fences or other structures at the edge of the 
outfield. The most famously idiosyncratic outfield boundary is the left-field 
wall at Boston's Fenway Park, in use since 1912: the Green Monster is 310 feet 
(94 m) from home plate down the line and 37 feet (11 m) tall.[118] 

Similarly, there are no regulations at all concerning the dimensions of foul 
territory. Thus a foul fly ball may be entirely out of play in a park with 
little space between the foul lines and the stands, but a foulout in a park with 
more expansive foul ground.[119] A fence in foul territory that is close to the 
outfield line will tend to direct balls that strike it back toward the fielders, 
while one that is farther away may actually prompt more collisions, as 
outfielders run full speed to field balls deep in the corner. These variations 
can make the difference between a double and a triple or inside-the-park home 
run.[120] The surface of the field is also unregulated. While the adjacent image 
shows a traditional field surfacing arrangement (and the one used by virtually 
all MLB teams with naturally surfaced fields), teams are free to decide what 
areas will be grassed or bare.[121] Some fields—including several in MLB—use an 
artificial surface, such as AstroTurf. Surface variations can have a significant 
effect on how ground balls behave and are fielded as well as on baserunning. 
Similarly, the presence of a roof (seven major league teams play in stadiums 
with permanent or retractable roofs) can greatly affect how fly balls are 
played.[122] While football and soccer players deal with similar variations of 
field surface and stadium covering, the size and shape of their fields are much 
more standardized. The area out-of-bounds on a football or soccer field does not 
affect play the way foul territory in baseball does, so variations in that 
regard are largely insignificant.[123] 


 


A New York Yankees batter and a Boston Red Sox catcher at Fenway Park.
These physical variations create a distinctive set of playing conditions at each 
ballpark. Other local factors, such as altitude and climate, can also 
significantly affect play. A given stadium may acquire a reputation as a 
pitcher's park or a hitter's park, if one or the other discipline notably 
benefits from its unique mix of elements. The most exceptional park in this 
regard is Coors Field, home of the Colorado Rockies. Its high altitude—5,282 
feet (1,610 m) above sea level—is responsible for giving it the strongest 
hitter's park effect in the major leagues due to the low air pressure.[124] 
Wrigley Field, home of the Chicago Cubs, is known for its fickle disposition: a 
hitter's park when the strong winds off Lake Michigan are blowing out, it 
becomes more of a pitcher's park when they are blowing in.[125] The absence of a 
standardized field affects not only how particular games play out, but the 
nature of team rosters and players' statistical records. For example, hitting a 
fly ball 330 feet (100 m) into right field might result in an easy catch on the 
warning track at one park, and a home run at another. A team that plays in a 
park with a relatively short right field, such as the New York Yankees, will 
tend to stock its roster with left-handed pull hitters, who can best exploit it. 
On the individual level, a player who spends most of his career with a team that 
plays in a hitter's park will gain an advantage in batting statistics over 
time—even more so if his talents are especially suited to the park.[126] 

Statistics

Further information: Baseball statistics

Organized baseball lends itself to statistics to a greater degree than many 
other sports. Each play is discrete and has a relatively small number of 
possible outcomes. In the late 19th century, a former cricket player, 
English-born Henry Chadwick of Brooklyn, was responsible for the "development of 
the box score, tabular standings, the annual baseball guide, the batting 
average, and most of the common statistics and tables used to describe 
baseball."[127] The statistical record is so central to the game's "historical 
essence" that Chadwick came to be known as Father Baseball.[127] In the 1920s, 
American newspapers began devoting more and more attention to baseball 
statistics, initiating what journalist and historian Alan Schwarz describes as a 
"tectonic shift in sports, as intrigue that once focused mostly on teams began 
to go to individual players and their statistics lines."[128] 

The Official Baseball Rules administered by MLB require the official scorer to 
categorize each baseball play unambiguously. The rules provide detailed criteria 
to promote consistency. The score report is the official basis for both the box 
score of the game and the relevant statistical records.[129] General managers, 
managers, and baseball scouts use statistics to evaluate players and make 
strategic decisions. 


 


Rickey Henderson—the major leagues' all-time leader in runs and stolen 
bases—stealing third base in a 1988 game
Certain traditional statistics are familiar to most baseball fans. The basic 
batting statistics include:[130] 
  At bats: plate appearances, excluding walks and hit by pitches—where the 
  batter's ability is not fully tested—and sacrifices and sacrifice flies—where 
  the batter intentionally makes an out in order to advance one or more 
  baserunners
  Hits: times reached base because of a batted, fair ball without fielding error 
  or fielder's choice
  Runs: times circling the bases and reaching home safely
  Runs batted in (RBIs): number of runners who scored due to a batter's action 
  (including the batter, in the case of a home run), except when batter grounded 
  into double play or reached on an error
  Home runs: hits on which the batter successfully touched all four bases, 
  without the contribution of a fielding error
  Batting average: hits divided by at bats—the traditional measure of batting 
  ability

The basic baserunning statistics include:[131] 
  Stolen bases: times advancing to the next base entirely due to the runner's 
  own efforts, generally while the pitcher is preparing to deliver or delivering 
  the ball
  Caught stealing: times tagged out while attempting to steal a base


 


Cy Young—the holder of many major league career marks, including wins and 
innings pitched, as well as losses—in 1908. MLB's annual awards for the best 
pitcher in each league are named for Young.
The basic pitching statistics include:[132] 
  Wins: credited to pitcher on winning team who last pitched before the team 
  took a lead that it never relinquished (a starting pitcher must pitch at least 
  five innings to qualify for a win)
  Losses: charged to pitcher on losing team who was pitching when the opposing 
  team took a lead that it never relinquished
  Saves: games where the pitcher enters a game led by the pitcher's team, 
  finishes the game without surrendering the lead, is not the winning pitcher, 
  and either (a) the lead was three runs or less when the pitcher entered the 
  game; (b) the potential tying run was on base, at bat, or on deck; or (c) the 
  pitcher pitched three or more innings
  Innings pitched: outs recorded while pitching divided by three (partial 
  innings are conventionally recorded as, e.g., "5.2" or "7.1", the last digit 
  actually representing thirds, not tenths, of an inning)
  Strikeouts: times pitching three strikes to a batter
  Winning percentage: wins divided by decisions (wins plus losses)
  Earned run average (ERA): runs allowed, excluding those resulting from 
  fielding errors, per nine innings pitched

The basic fielding statistics include:[133] 
  Putouts: times the fielder catches a fly ball, tags or forces out a runner, or 
  otherwise directly effects an out
  Assists: times a putout by another fielder was recorded following the fielder 
  touching the ball
  Errors: times the fielder fails to make a play that should have been made with 
  common effort, and the batting team benefits as a result
  Total chances: putouts plus assists plus errors
  Fielding average: successful chances (putouts plus assists) divided by total 
  chances

Among the many other statistics that are kept are those collectively known as 
situational statistics. For example, statistics can indicate which specific 
pitchers a certain batter performs best against. If a given situation 
statistically favors a certain batter, the manager of the fielding team may be 
more likely to change pitchers or have the pitcher intentionally walk the batter 
in order to face one who is less likely to succeed.[134] 

Sabermetrics

Sabermetrics refers to the field of baseball statistical study and the 
development of new statistics and analytical tools. The term is also used to 
refer directly to new statistics themselves. The term was coined around 1980 by 
one of the field's leading proponents, Bill James, and derives from the Society 
for American Baseball Research (SABR).[135] 

The growing popularity of sabermetrics since the early 1980s has brought more 
attention to two batting statistics that sabermetricians argue are much better 
gauges of a batter's skill than batting average:[136] 
  On-base percentage measures a batter's ability to get on base. It is 
  calculated by taking the sum of the batter's successes in getting on base 
  (hits plus walks plus hit by pitches) and dividing that by the batter's total 
  plate appearances (at bats plus walks plus hit by pitches plus sacrifice 
  flies), except for sacrifice bunts.[137]
  Slugging percentage measures a batter's ability to hit for power. It is 
  calculated by taking the batter's total bases (one per each single, two per 
  double, three per triple, and four per home run) and dividing that by the 
  batter's at bats.[138]

Some of the new statistics devised by sabermetricians have gained wide use: 
  On-base plus slugging (OPS) measures a batter's overall ability. It is 
  calculated by adding the batter's on-base percentage and slugging 
  percentage.[139]
  Walks plus hits per inning pitched (WHIP) measures a pitcher's ability at 
  preventing hitters from reaching base. It is calculated exactly as its name 
  suggests.[140]

Popularity and cultural impact


 


Two players on the baseball team of Tokyo, Japan's Waseda University in 1921
Writing in 1919, philosopher Morris Raphael Cohen described baseball as 
America's national religion.[141] In the words of sports columnist Jayson Stark, 
baseball has long been "a unique paragon of American culture"—a status he sees 
as devastated by the steroid abuse scandal.[142] Baseball has an important place 
in other national cultures as well: Scholar Peter Bjarkman describes "how deeply 
the sport is ingrained in the history and culture of a nation such as Cuba, 
[and] how thoroughly it was radically reshaped and nativized in Japan."[143] 
Since the early 1980s, the Dominican Republic, in particular the city of San 
Pedro de Macorís, has been the major leagues' primary source of foreign 
talent.[144] In 2017, 83 of the 868 players on MLB Opening Day rosters (and 
disabled lists) were from the country. Among other Caribbean countries and 
territories, a combined 97 MLB players were born in Venezuela, Cuba, and Puerto 
Rico.[145] Hall-of-Famer Roberto Clemente remains one of the greatest national 
heroes in Puerto Rico's history.[146] While baseball has long been the island's 
primary athletic pastime, its once well-attended professional winter league has 
declined in popularity since 1990, when young Puerto Rican players began to be 
included in the major leagues' annual first-year player draft.[147] In Asia, 
baseball is among the most popular sports in Japan and South Korea.[148] 

The major league game in the United States was originally targeted toward a 
middle-class, white-collar audience: relative to other spectator pastimes, the 
National League's set ticket price of 50 cents in 1876 was high, while the 
location of playing fields outside the inner city and the workweek daytime 
scheduling of games were also obstacles to a blue-collar audience.[149] A 
century later, the situation was very different. With the rise in popularity of 
other team sports with much higher average ticket prices—football, basketball, 
and hockey—professional baseball had become among the most blue-collar-oriented 
of leading American spectator sports.[150] 

Overall, baseball has a large following in the United States; a 2006 poll found 
that nearly half of Americans are fans.[151] In the late 1900s and early 2000s, 
baseball's position compared to football in the United States moved in 
contradictory directions. In 2008, MLB set a revenue record of $6.5 billion, 
matching the NFL's revenue for the first time in decades.[152] A new MLB revenue 
record of more than $10 billion was set in 2017.[153] On the other hand, the 
percentage of American sports fans polled who named baseball as their favorite 
sport was 9%, compared to pro football at 37%.[154] In 1985, the respective 
figures were pro football 24%, baseball 23%.[155] Because there are so many more 
major league games played, there is no comparison in overall attendance.[156] In 
2008, total attendance at major league games was the second-highest in history: 
78.6 million, 0.7% off the record set the previous year.[81] The following year, 
amid the U.S. recession, attendance fell by 6.6% to 73.4 million.[157] Eight 
years later, it dropped under 73 million.[158] Attendance at games held under 
the Minor League Baseball umbrella set a record in 2008, with 43.3 million.[159] 


 


An Afghan girl playing baseball in August 2002
In Japan, where baseball is inarguably the leading spectator team sport, 
combined revenue for the twelve teams in Nippon Professional Baseball (NPB), the 
body that oversees both the Central and Pacific Leagues, was estimated at $1 
billion in 2007. Total NPB attendance for the year was approximately 20 million. 
While in the preceding two decades, MLB attendance grew by 50 percent and 
revenue nearly tripled, the comparable NPB figures were stagnant. There are 
concerns that MLB's growing interest in acquiring star Japanese players will 
hurt the game in their home country.[160] In Cuba, where baseball is by every 
reckoning the national sport,[161] the national team overshadows the city and 
provincial teams that play in the top-level domestic leagues.[162] Revenue 
figures are not released for the country's amateur system. Similarly, according 
to one official pronouncement, the sport's governing authority "has never taken 
into account attendance ... because its greatest interest has always been the 
development of athletes".[163] 

As of 2018[update], Little League Baseball oversees leagues with close to 2.4 
million participants in over 80 countries.[164] The number of players has fallen 
since the 1990s, when 3 million children took part in Little League Baseball 
annually.[165] Babe Ruth League teams have over 1 million participants.[166] 
According to the president of the International Baseball Federation, between 
300,000 and 500,000 women and girls play baseball around the world, including 
Little League and the introductory game of Tee Ball.[167] 

A varsity baseball team is an established part of physical education departments 
at most high schools and colleges in the United States.[168] In 2015, nearly 
half a million high schoolers and over 34,000 collegians played on their 
schools' baseball teams.[169] By early in the 20th century, intercollegiate 
baseball was Japan's leading sport. Today, high school baseball in particular is 
immensely popular there.[170] The final rounds of the two annual tournaments—the 
National High School Baseball Invitational Tournament in the spring, and the 
even more important National High School Baseball Championship in the summer—are 
broadcast around the country. The tournaments are known, respectively, as Spring 
Koshien and Summer Koshien after the 55,000-capacity stadium where they are 
played.[171] In Cuba, baseball is a mandatory part of the state system of 
physical education, which begins at age six. Talented children as young as seven 
are sent to special district schools for more intensive training—the first step 
on a ladder whose acme is the national baseball team.[162] 

In popular culture


 


The American Tobacco Company's line of baseball cards featured shortstop Honus 
Wagner of the Pittsburgh Pirates from 1909 to 1911. In 2007, the card shown here 
sold for $2.8 million.[172]
Baseball has had a broad impact on popular culture, both in the United States 
and elsewhere. Dozens of English-language idioms have been derived from 
baseball; in particular, the game is the source of a number of widely used 
sexual euphemisms.[173] The first networked radio broadcasts in North America 
were of the 1922 World Series: famed sportswriter Grantland Rice announced 
play-by-play from New York City's Polo Grounds on WJZ–Newark, New Jersey, which 
was connected by wire to WGY–Schenectady, New York, and WBZ–Springfield, 
Massachusetts.[174] The baseball cap has become a ubiquitous fashion item not 
only in the United States and Japan, but also in countries where the sport 
itself is not particularly popular, such as the United Kingdom.[175] 

Baseball has inspired many works of art and entertainment. One of the first 
major examples, Ernest Thayer's poem "Casey at the Bat", appeared in 1888. A wry 
description of the failure of a star player in what would now be called a 
"clutch situation", the poem became the source of vaudeville and other staged 
performances, audio recordings, film adaptations, and an opera, as well as a 
host of sequels and parodies in various media. There have been many baseball 
movies, including the Academy Award–winning The Pride of the Yankees (1942) and 
the Oscar nominees The Natural (1984) and Field of Dreams (1989). The American 
Film Institute's selection of the ten best sports movies includes The Pride of 
the Yankees at number 3 and Bull Durham (1988) at number 5.[176] Baseball has 
provided thematic material for hits on both stage—the Adler–Ross musical Damn 
Yankees—and record—George J. Gaskin's "Slide, Kelly, Slide", Simon and 
Garfunkel's "Mrs. Robinson", and John Fogerty's "Centerfield".[177] The 
baseball-inspired comedic sketch "Who's on First", popularized by Abbott and 
Costello in 1938, quickly became famous. Six decades later, Time named it the 
best comedy routine of the 20th century.[178] 

Literary works connected to the game include the short fiction of Ring Lardner 
and novels such as Bernard Malamud's The Natural (the source for the movie), 
Robert Coover's The Universal Baseball Association, Inc., J. Henry Waugh, Prop., 
and W. P. Kinsella's Shoeless Joe (the source for Field of Dreams). Baseball's 
literary canon also includes the beat reportage of Damon Runyon; the columns of 
Grantland Rice, Red Smith, Dick Young, and Peter Gammons; and the essays of 
Roger Angell. Among the celebrated nonfiction books in the field are Lawrence S. 
Ritter's The Glory of Their Times, Roger Kahn's The Boys of Summer, and Michael 
Lewis's Moneyball. The 1970 publication of major league pitcher Jim Bouton's 
tell-all chronicle Ball Four is considered a turning point in the reporting of 
professional sports.[179] 

Baseball has also inspired the creation of new cultural forms. Baseball cards 
were introduced in the late 19th century as trade cards. A typical example 
featured an image of a baseball player on one side and advertising for a 
business on the other. In the early 1900s they were produced widely as 
promotional items by tobacco and confectionery companies. The 1930s saw the 
popularization of the modern style of baseball card, with a player photograph 
accompanied on the rear by statistics and biographical data. Baseball cards—many 
of which are now prized collectibles—are the source of the much broader trading 
card industry, involving similar products for different sports and 
non-sports-related fields.[180] 

Modern fantasy sports began in 1980 with the invention of Rotisserie League 
Baseball by New York writer Daniel Okrent and several friends. Participants in a 
Rotisserie league draft notional teams from the list of active MLB players and 
play out an entire imaginary season with game outcomes based on the players' 
latest real-world statistics. Rotisserie-style play quickly became a phenomenon. 
Now known more generically as fantasy baseball, it has inspired similar games 
based on an array of different sports.[181] The field boomed with increasing 
Internet access and new fantasy sports-related websites. By 2008, 29.9 million 
people in the United States and Canada were playing fantasy sports, spending 
$800 million on the hobby.[182] The burgeoning popularity of fantasy baseball is 
also credited with the increasing attention paid to sabermetrics—first among 
fans, only later among baseball professionals.[183] 

See also

   Baseball portal
  Baseball awards
  Baseball clothing and equipment
  Glossary of baseball
  List of organized baseball leagues
  Related sportsBrännboll (Scandinavian bat-and-ball game)
  British baseball
  Cricket
  Lapta (game) (Russian bat-and-ball game)
  Oină (Romanian bat-and-ball game)
  Pesäpallo ("Finnish baseball")
  Stickball
  Stoop ball
  Vitilla
  Wiffle ball


Find more about
Baseball
at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary 
  Media from Wikimedia Commons 
  Quotations from Wikiquote 
  Texts from Wikisource 
  Textbooks from Wikibooks 
  World Baseball Softball Confederation
  "Baseball". Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
  Baseball Prospectus
  Society for American Baseball Research
  Mister Baseball European baseball news
  Baseball Heritage Museum at League Park in Cleveland, Ohio



    show
      v
      t
      e


    Baseball concepts


    Outline, Glossary


  Rules

      Rules of baseball
       Ground rules
       Infield fly rule
       Interference
       Pitch clock


  Park/Field

      Backstop
       Baseball diamond
       Batter's box
       Batter's eye
       Bullpen
       Dugout
       Foul pole
       Foul territory
       Infield
       On-deck circle
       Outfield
       Warning track


  Equipment

      Ball
       Bat
       Batting cage
       Batting glove
       Batting helmet
       Cap
       Doughnut
       Glove (defense)
       Pitching machine
       Protective cup
       Shin guard
       Stirrups
       Uniform
       Uniform number


  Game process

      Batting order
       Extra innings
       Innings
       On-deck
       Out
       Positions
       Run
       Seventh-inning stretch
       Pace of play


  Batting

      At bat
       Baltimore chop
       Bat flip
       Chinese home run
       Batting count
       Bunt sacrifice bunt
         slap bunt
         squeeze play

       Checked swing
       Cleanup hitter
       Designated hitter
       Double
       Double switch
       Foul ball
       Foul tip
       Golden sombrero
       Grand slam
       Ground rule double
       Hat trick
       Hit
       Hit and run
       Hit by pitch
       Hitting for the cycle
       Home run
       Infield hit
       Inside-the-park home run
       Leadoff hitter
       Lefty-righty switch
       Line drive
       Moonshot
       Plate appearance
       Platoon system
       Pull hitter
       Sacrifice fly
       Single
       Strikeout
       Strike zone
       Sweet spot
       Switch hitter
       Triple
       Walk
       Walk-off home run


  Pitching

      Balk
       Beanball
       Breaking ball
       Brushback pitch
       Changeup
       Curveball
       Eephus
       Fastball
       Full count
       Immaculate inning
       Inside pitching
       Intentional walk
       Knuckleball
       No-hitter
       Perfect game
       Pitch count
       Pitchout
       Quick pitch
       Screwball
       Shutout
       Slider
       Spitball
       Strikeout
       Striking out the side
       Time of pitch
       Wild pitch


  Base running

      Balk
       Bases loaded
       Caught stealing
       Contact play
       Hit and run
       Left on base
       Obstruction
       Safe
       Scoring position
       Slide
       Small ball
       Squeeze play
       Stolen base
       Tag up


  Fielding
  (positioning)

      Appeal play
       Assist
       Blocking the plate
       Catch
       Defensive indifference
       Double play
       Error
       Fielder's choice
       Fifth infielder
       Force play
       Fourth out
       Hidden ball trick
       In-between hop
       Infield fly rule
       Infield shift
       Interference
       Passed ball
       Pickoff
       Putout
       Rundown
       Tag out
       Triple play unassisted

       Uncaught third strike
       Wall climb
       Wheel play


  Miscellaneous

      Baseball statistics
       Bench jockey
       Bench-clearing brawl
       Dead ball
       Jargon
       In flight
       Pepper
       Scorekeeping
       Series
       Shagging
       Slump
       Streak (losing)
       Streak (winning)



       Category
        Portal
        WikiProject




    show
      v
      t
      e


    Baseball positions


  Pitchers



        by role

            Starter Ace
               Opener

             Reliever Middle reliever
               Long reliever
               Setup man
               Closer
               Left-handed specialist



        by style

            Power
             Control
             Ground ball
             Fly ball
             Switch






  Defensive
  players



        by number

            Pitcher (1 / P)
             Catcher (2 / C)
             First baseman (3 / 1B)
             Second baseman (4 / 2B)
             Third baseman (5 / 3B)
             Shortstop (6 / SS)
             Left fielder (7 / LF)
             Center fielder (8 / CF)
             Right fielder (9 / RF)


        by type

            Pitcher
             Catcher
             Infielder
             Outfielder
             Utility player
             Utility infielder
             Position player
             Fourth outfielder
             Corner outfielder




  Offensive
  players



        by role

            Batter
             Runner
             Batting order (1–9)
             Designated hitter
             Pinch hitter
             Pinch runner
             Lead off
             Leadoff hitter
             Cleanup hitter


        by style

            Clutch hitter
             Contact hitter
             Power hitter
             Switch hitter




  Non-players

      Official scorer
       Umpire
       Manager
       Coaches
       Batboy
       Ball boy/girl
       General manager


  Related

      Captain
       Battery
       Disabled list
       Phantom ballplayer
       Platoon system




    show
      v
      t
      e


    Baseball statistics


  Batting

      Batting average
       On-base percentage
       Slugging percentage
       Hit Single
         Double
         Triple
         Home run
         Extra-base hit

       Grand slam
       Total bases
       RBI
       Game-winning RBI
       Walk
       Bunt
       Sacrifice bunt
       Sacrifice fly
       On-base plus slugging
       Times on base
       Walk-to-strikeout ratio
       Walk percentage


  Base running

      Run
       Stolen base
       Stolen base percentage
       Caught stealing


  Pitching

      Win–loss record
       Innings pitched
       Pitchers of record
       Save
       Hold
       Run Earned

       ERA
       Strikeout
       Walk
       Perfect game
       No-hitter
       WHIP
       BB/9
       K/9
       Quality start
       Complete game
       Shutout
       Wild pitch
       Strikeout-to-walk ratio


  Fielding

      Fielding percentage
       Assist
       Putout
       Error
       Fielder's choice
       Defensive indifference
       Passed ball


  Sabermetrics

      Adjusted ERA+
       Base runs
       Batting average on balls in play
       Batting park factor
       Catcher's ERA
       Defensive Runs Saved
       Extrapolated Runs
       Game score
       Isolated Power
       Range factor
       Runs created
       Runs produced
       Secondary average
       Speed Score
       NERD
       Out of zone plays made
       Ultimate zone rating
       Value over replacement player
       Weighted on-base average
       Wins Above Replacement
       Win probability added
       Win Shares




    show
      v
      t
      e


    International baseball


      WBSC (former governing body: IBAF)
       World Rankings
       Teams


  WBSC Events

      World Baseball Classic
       WBSC Premier12
       U23 World Cup
       U18 World Cup
       U15 World Cup
       U12 World Cup
       Women's Baseball World Cup






  Minor World Events

      Grand Forks International
       Haarlem Baseball Week
       Summer Universiade
       World Baseball Challenge
       World Port Tournament
       World University


  Defunct World Events

      Baseball at the Summer Olympics
       World Games
       Baseball World Cup
       Intercontinental Cup
       Women's Baseball World Series


  Africa

      African Baseball & Softball Association – All-Africa Games


  Americas

      Pan American Baseball Confederation – Pan American Games
       America Cup
       Caribbean Series
       Central American and Caribbean Games
       South American Games


  Asia

      Baseball Federation of Asia – Asian Championship
       Asian Games
       Junior (under 18)
       Southeast Asian Games
       SAARC Baseball Championship
       Asia Series


  Europe

      Confederation of European Baseball – European Championship
       Super 6
       European Cup
       "Final Four"
       U-23
       U-21
       Junior (U-18)
       Youth (U-15)
       Juveniles (U-12)


  Oceania

      Baseball Confederation of Oceania – Oceania Championship
       Pacific Games




    show
      v
      t
      e


    Team sports


      Sport
       Governing bodies
       Sportspeople
       National sport


  Basket sports

      Basketball beach
         deaf
         3x3
         water
         wheelchair

       Cestoball
       Korfball
       Netball Fast5
         indoor
         wheelchair

       Rezball
       Ringball
       Slamball


  Football codes



            Association football amputee
               beach
               freestyle
               Futsal
               indoor
               Jorkyball
               paralympic
               powerchair
               roller
               street
               walking

             Australian rules football AFLX
               Lightning football
               Metro footy
               Nine-a-side
               Rec footy

             Gaelic football Ladies'

             Circle rules football


        Gridiron codes

            American football eight-man
               flag
               nine-man
               six-man
               sprint
               touch
               wheelchair

             Canadian football
             Indoor American football Arena football



        Hybrid codes

            Austus
             Eton wall game
             International rules football
             Samoa rules
             Speedball
             Swedish football
             Universal football
             Volata


        Medieval football codes

            Ba game
             Caid
             Calcio fiorentino
             Camping
             Cnapan
             Cornish hurling
             Cuju
             Harpastum
             Kemari
             Ki-o-rahi
             Jegichagi
             La soule
             Lelo burti
             Marn grook
             Pasuckuakohowog
             Royal Shrovetide
             Uppies and downies
             Yubi lakpi


        Rugby codes

            Beach
             Rugby league masters
               mod
               nines
               sevens
               tag
               wheelchair

             Rugby union American flag
               mini
               sevens
               snow
               tag
               touch
               tens

             Touch
             Wheelchair




  Bat-and-ball games

      Baseball
       Brännboll
       Corkball
       Cricket One Day
         Test
         Twenty20

       Danish longball
       Indoor cricket
       Kickball
       Lapta
       Matball
       Oină
       Over-the-line
       Pesäpallo
       Rounders
       Softball Fastpitch

       Stickball
       Stoolball
       Town ball
       Vigoro
       Vitilla
       Welsh/British baseball
       Wiffle ball
       Wireball


  Stick and ball sports



            Bando
             Cammag
             Hurling Camogie
               Super11s
               Shinty–Hurling

             Indigenous North American stickball
             Iomain
             Knattleikr
             Knotty
             Lacrosse box/indoor
               field
               intercrosse
               women's

             Ritinis
             Shinty Shinty–Hurling



        Hockey sports

            Ball hockey
             Bandy rink

             Broomball Moscow

             Field hockey indoor

             Floor hockey
             Floorball
             Ice hockey pond
               power
               ice sledge
               underwater

             Ringette
             Rinkball
             Roller hockey in-line
               quad

             Rossall hockey
             Shinny
             Street hockey
             Underwater hockey
             Unicycle hockey


        Polo sports

            Auto polo
             Cowboy polo
             Cycle polo
             Elephant polo
             Horseball
             Motoball
             Pato
             Polo Arena polo
               chovgan
               snow polo

             Polocrosse
             Segway polo
             Yak polo




  Net sports

      Ball badminton
       Beach tennis
       Biribol
       Bossaball
       Fistball
       Footbag net
       Football tennis
       Footvolley
       Jianzi
       Jokgu
       Newcomb ball
       Peteca
       Sepak takraw
       Throwball
       Volleyball beach
         paralympic



  Other sports

      Airsoft
       Angleball
       Balle à la main
       Ballon au poing
       Basque pelota frontenis
         jai alai
         xare

       Bo-taoshi
       Boules Bocce
         Bocce volo
         Boccia
         Bowls
         Jeu provençal
         Pétanque
         Raffa

       Buzkashi
       Combat (juggling)
       Curling wheelchair

       Cycle ball
       Digor
       Dodgeball
       Flickerball
       Gateball
       Goalball
       Guts
       Handball beach
         Czech
         field

       Hornussen
       Ice stock sport
       Jereed
       Kabaddi indoor
         beach

       Kho kho
       Kin-Ball
       Lagori
       Longue paume
       Makura-Nage
       Mesoamerican ballgame
       Paintball
       Pelota mixteca
       Prisonball
       Pushball
       Quidditch
       Rollball
       Roller derby
       Slahal
       Snow snake
       Synchronized skating
       Synchronized swimming
       Tamburello
       Tchoukball beach

       Tejo
       Tug of war
       Ulama
       Ultimate
       Underwater football
       Underwater rugby
       Valencian pilota Llargues

       Water polo canoe
         inner tube
         beach

       Waboba
       Whirlyball
       Woodball
       Yukigassen


       Portal




    show
      v
      t
      e


    Professional baseball leagues




          Americas


        Major

            Major League Baseball American League
               National League



        Minor



              .mw-parser-output .nobold{font-weight:normal}Triple-A

                  International League
                   Pacific Coast League
                   Mexican League


              Double-A

                  Eastern League
                   Southern League
                   Texas League


              Class A Advanced

                  California League
                   Carolina League
                   Florida State League


              Class A

                  Midwest League
                   South Atlantic League


              Class A Short Season

                  New York–Penn League
                   Northwest League


              Rookie Advanced

                  Appalachian League
                   Pioneer League


              Rookie

                  Arizona League
                   Dominican Summer League
                   Gulf Coast League




        Independent

            American Association
             Atlantic League
             Can-Am League
             Empire League
             Frontier League
             Pacific Association
             Pecos League
             United Shore League


        Off-season



              MLB-affiliated

                  Arizona Fall League
                   Dominican Professional Baseball League
                   Liga Paralela
                   Mexican Pacific League
                   Puerto Rico Baseball League
                   Venezuelan Professional Baseball League


              Independent

                  Colombian Professional Baseball League
                   Nicaraguan Professional Baseball League
                   Panamanian Professional Baseball League
                   Veracruz Winter League




        Defunct
        Major Leagues

            All-American Girls Professional Baseball League
             American Association
             Continental League
             Cuban League
             Federal League
             National Association
             Negro league baseball
             Players' League
             Union Association
             United States Baseball League Defunct minor leagues







          Asia


        China



              Major

                  China Baseball League




        Japan



              Major

                  Nippon Professional Baseball Central League
                     Pacific League



              Minor

                  Eastern League
                   Western League


              Off-season

                  Miyazaki Phoenix League


              Independent

                  Baseball Challenge League
                   Shikoku Island League Plus


              Women's

                  Japan Women's Baseball League




        South Korea



              Major

                  KBO League


              Minor

                  KBO Futures League




        Taiwan

            Major: Chinese Professional Baseball League
             Minor: Popcorn League






          Europe


        Euro

            Euro League Baseball


        Italy



              Major

                  Italian Baseball League 1D


              Minor

                  Italian Baseball League 2D




        Netherlands



              Major

                  Honkbal Hoofdklasse


              Minor

                  Honkbal Overgangsklasse


              Rookie

                  Honkbal Rookie League








          Oceania


        Australia



              MLB-affiliated:

                Australian Baseball League








          Inter-league and Professional National Team Championships


            Asia Professional Baseball Championship
             Caribbean Series
             Triple-A National Championship Game
             World Baseball Classic






    show
      v
      t
      e


    Summer Olympic sports


  Core program

      Aquatics Artistic
         Diving
         Swimming
         Water polo

       Archery
       Athletics
       Badminton
       Basketball 3x3

       Boxing
       Canoeing Canoe slalom
         Canoe sprint

       Cycling BMX racing
         Freestyle BMX
         Mountain bike
         Road cycling
         Track cycling

       Equestrian Dressage
         Eventing
         Show jumping

       Fencing
       Field hockey
       Football
       Golf
       Gymnastics Artistic gymnastics
         Rhythmic gymnastics
         Trampolining

       Handball
       Judo
       Modern pentathlon
       Rowing
       Rugby sevens
       Sailing
       Shooting
       Table tennis
       Taekwondo
       Tennis
       Triathlon
       Volleyball Beach volleyball

       Weightlifting
       Wrestling Freestyle wrestling
         Greco-Roman wrestling



  2020 addition

      Baseball / Softball
       Karate
       Skateboarding
       Sport climbing
       Surfing


      See also: Paralympic sports and Winter Olympic sports






    Authority control 

        WorldCat Identities
         GND: 4144091-2
         LCCN: sh85012026
         NARA: 10639906
         NDL: 00574218
         VIAF: 180227358

   <img src="//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1" 
alt="" title="" width="1" height="1" style="border: none; position: absolute;" 
/>
Retrieved from 
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Baseball&oldid=866097399" 


