 Association football


From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

  (Redirected from Soccer)


Jump to navigation

Jump to search



"Soccer" redirects here. For other uses, see Soccer (disambiguation).

This article is about the sport of association football. For other codes of 
football, see Football.



  Association football


      The attacking player (No. 10) attempts to kick the ball beyond the 
      opposing team's goalkeeper, between the goalposts, and beneath the 
      crossbar to score a goal.


    Highest governing body
      FIFA

    Nicknames
      Football, soccer, the Beautiful Game, the World Game[1]

    First played
      Mid-19th century England[2][3][4]

    Characteristics


    Contact
      Permitted (limited)

    Team members
      11 per side (including goalkeeper)

    Mixed gender
      No, separate competitions

    Type
      Team sport, ball sport

    Equipment
      Football (or soccer ball)

    Venue
      Football pitch (also known as football field, football ground, soccer 
      field, soccer pitch or simply "pitch")

    Glossary
      Glossary of association football

    Presence


    Country or region
      Worldwide

    Olympic
      Yes, men's since the 1900 Olympics and women's since the 1996 Olympics

    Paralympic
      Yes, 5-a-side since 2004 and 7-a-side since 1984

Association football, more commonly known as football or soccer,[a] is a team 
sport played between two teams of eleven players with a spherical ball. It is 
played by 250 million players in over 200 countries and dependencies, making it 
the world's most popular sport.[5][6][7][8] The game is played on a rectangular 
field called a pitch with a goal at each end. The object of the game is to score 
by moving the ball beyond the goal line into the opposing goal. 

Association football is one of a family of football codes, which emerged from 
various ball games played worldwide since antiquity. The modern game traces its 
origins to 1863 when the Laws of the Game were originally codified in England by 
The Football Association. 

Players are not allowed to touch the ball with hands or arms while it is in 
play, except for the goalkeepers within the penalty area. Other players mainly 
use their feet to strike or pass the ball, but may also use any other part of 
their body except the hands and the arms. The team that scores most goals by the 
end of the match wins. If the score is level at the end of the game, either a 
draw is declared or the game goes into extra time or a penalty shootout 
depending on the format of the competition. Association football is governed 
internationally by the International Federation of Association Football (FIFA; 
French: Fédération Internationale de Football Association), which organises 
World Cups for both men and women every four years.[9] 

 Main article: Names for association football

The rules of association football were codified in England by the Football 
Association in 1863 and the name association football was coined to distinguish 
the game from the other forms of football played at the time, specifically rugby 
football. The first written "reference to the inflated ball used in the game" 
was in the mid-14th century: "Þe heued fro þe body went, Als it were a 
foteballe".[10] The Online Etymology Dictionary states that the "rules of the 
game" were made in 1848, before the "split off in 1863".[11] The term soccer 
comes from a slang or jocular abbreviation of the word "association", with the 
suffix "-er" appended to it.[12] The word soccer (which arrived at it's final 
form in 1895) was first recorded in 1889 in the earlier form of socca.[13] 

Within the English-speaking world, association football is now usually called 
football in the United Kingdom and mainly soccer in Canada and the United 
States. People in Australia, Ireland, South Africa and New Zealand use either or 
both terms, although national associations in Australia and New Zealand now 
primarily use "football" for the formal name.[14] 

History

Main article: History of association football
@media all and (max-width:720px){.mw-parser-output 
.tmulti>.thumbinner{width:100%!important;max-width:none!important}.mw-parser-outputl
.tmulti 
.tsingle{float:none!important;max-width:none!important;width:100%!important;text-align:center}}





Children playing cuju in Song dynasty China.




An episkyros player on an ancient stone carving at the National Archaeological 
Museum, Athens.[15]

According to FIFA, the Chinese competitive game cuju (蹴鞠, literally "kick ball") 
is the earliest form of football for which there is evidence.[4] Cuju players 
could use any part of the body apart from hands and the intent was kicking a 
ball through an opening into a net. It was remarkably similar to modern 
football, though similarities to rugby occurred.[16][17] During the Han Dynasty 
(206 BC – 220 AD), cuju games were standardised and rules were established.[16] 

Phaininda and episkyros were Greek ball games.[18][19] An image of an episkyros 
player depicted in low relief on a vase at the National Archaeological Museum of 
Athens[15] appears on the UEFA European Championship Cup.[20] Athenaeus, writing 
in 228 AD, referenced the Roman ball game harpastum. Phaininda, episkyros and 
harpastum were played involving hands and violence. They all appear to have 
resembled rugby football, wrestling and volleyball more than what is 
recognizable as modern football.[16][21][22][23][24][25] As with pre-codified 
"mob football", the antecedent of all modern football codes, these three games 
involved more handling the ball than kicking.[26][27] Other games included 
kemari in Japan and chuk-guk in Korea.[28][29] 

Association football in itself does not have a classical history.[20] 
Notwithstanding any similarities to other ball games played around the world 
FIFA has recognised that no historical connection exists with any game played in 
antiquity outside Europe.[30] The modern rules of association football are based 
on the mid-19th century efforts to standardise the widely varying forms of 
football played in the public schools of England. The history of football in 
England dates back to at least the eighth century AD.[31] 

The Cambridge Rules, first drawn up at Cambridge University in 1848, were 
particularly influential in the development of subsequent codes, including 
association football. The Cambridge Rules were written at Trinity College, 
Cambridge, at a meeting attended by representatives from Eton, Harrow, Rugby, 
Winchester and Shrewsbury schools. They were not universally adopted. During the 
1850s, many clubs unconnected to schools or universities were formed throughout 
the English-speaking world, to play various forms of football. Some came up with 
their own distinct codes of rules, most notably the Sheffield Football Club, 
formed by former public school pupils in 1857,[32] which led to formation of a 
Sheffield FA in 1867. In 1862, John Charles Thring of Uppingham School also 
devised an influential set of rules.[33] 

These ongoing efforts contributed to the formation of The Football Association 
(The FA) in 1863, which first met on the morning of 26 October 1863 at the 
Freemasons' Tavern in Great Queen Street, London.[34] The only school to be 
represented on this occasion was Charterhouse. The Freemason's Tavern was the 
setting for five more meetings between October and December, which eventually 
produced the first comprehensive set of rules. At the final meeting, the first 
FA treasurer, the representative from Blackheath, withdrew his club from the FA 
over the removal of two draft rules at the previous meeting: the first allowed 
for running with the ball in hand; the second for obstructing such a run by 
hacking (kicking an opponent in the shins), tripping and holding. Other English 
rugby clubs followed this lead and did not join the FA and instead in 1871 
formed the Rugby Football Union. The eleven remaining clubs, under the charge of 
Ebenezer Cobb Morley, went on to ratify the original thirteen laws of the 
game.[34] These rules included handling of the ball by "marks" and the lack of a 
crossbar, rules which made it remarkably similar to Victorian rules football 
being developed at that time in Australia. The Sheffield FA played by its own 
rules until the 1870s with the FA absorbing some of its rules until there was 
little difference between the games.[35] 

The world's oldest football competition is the FA Cup, which was founded by C. 
W. Alcock and has been contested by English teams since 1872. The first official 
international football match also took place in 1872, between Scotland and 
England in Glasgow, again at the instigation of C. W. Alcock. England is also 
home to the world's first football league, which was founded in Birmingham in 
1888 by Aston Villa director William McGregor.[36] The original format contained 
12 clubs from the Midlands and Northern England. 


 


The Aston Villa team in 1897, after winning both the FA Cup and the Football 
League.
The laws of the game are determined by the International Football Association 
Board (IFAB).[37] The board was formed in 1886[38] after a meeting in Manchester 
of The Football Association, the Scottish Football Association, the Football 
Association of Wales, and the Irish Football Association. FIFA, the 
international football body, was formed in Paris in 1904 and declared that they 
would adhere to Laws of the Game of the Football Association.[39] The growing 
popularity of the international game led to the admittance of FIFA 
representatives to the International Football Association Board in 1913. The 
board consists of four representatives from FIFA and one representative from 
each of the four British associations.[40] 

Today, football is played at a professional level all over the world. Millions 
of people regularly go to football stadiums to follow their favourite teams,[41] 
while billions more watch the game on television or on the internet.[42][43] A 
very large number of people also play football at an amateur level. According to 
a survey conducted by FIFA published in 2001, over 240 million people from more 
than 200 countries regularly play football.[44] Football has the highest global 
television audience in sport.[45] 

In many parts of the world football evokes great passions and plays an important 
role in the life of individual fans, local communities, and even nations. R. 
Kapuscinski says that Europeans who are polite, modest, or humble fall easily 
into rage when playing or watching football games.[46] The Côte d'Ivoire 
national football team helped secure a truce to the nation's civil war in 
2006[47] and it helped further reduce tensions between government and rebel 
forces in 2007 by playing a match in the rebel capital of Bouaké, an occasion 
that brought both armies together peacefully for the first time.[48] By 
contrast, football is widely considered to have been the final proximate cause 
for the Football War in June 1969 between El Salvador and Honduras.[49] The 
sport also exacerbated tensions at the beginning of the Yugoslav Wars of the 
1990s, when a match between Dinamo Zagreb and Red Star Belgrade degenerated into 
rioting in May 1990.[50] 

Women's association football

Main article: Women's association football


 


A women's international match between the United States and Germany
Early women's football

Women may have been playing "football" for as long as the game has existed. 
Evidence shows that an ancient version of the game (Tsu Chu) was played by women 
during the Han Dynasty (25–220 CE). Two female figures are depicted in Han 
Dynasty (25–220 CE) frescoes, playing Tsu Chu.[51] There are, however, a number 
of opinions about the accuracy of dates, the earliest estimates at 5000 BCE.[52] 

Association football, the modern game, also has documented early involvement of 
women. An annual competition in Mid-Lothian, Scotland during the 1790s is 
reported, too.[53][54] In 1863, football governing bodies introduced 
standardised rules to prohibit violence on the pitch, making it more socially 
acceptable for women to play.[55] The first match recorded by the Scottish 
Football Association took place in 1892 in Glasgow. In England, the first 
recorded game of football between women took place in 1895.[55][56] 

The most well-documented early European team was founded by activist Nettie 
Honeyball in England in 1894. It was named the British Ladies' Football Club. 
Nettie Honeyball is quoted, "I founded the association late last year [1894], 
with the fixed resolve of proving to the world that women are not the 
'ornamental and useless' creatures men have pictured. I must confess, my 
convictions on all matters where the sexes are so widely divided are all on the 
side of emancipation, and I look forward to the time when ladies may sit in 
Parliament and have a voice in the direction of affairs, especially those which 
concern them most." [57] Honeyball and those like her paved the way for women's 
football. However, the women's game was frowned upon by the British football 
associations, and continued without their support. It has been suggested that 
this was motivated by a perceived threat to the 'masculinity' of the game.[58] 


 


A Welsh women's football team pose for a photograph in 1959
Women's football became popular on a large scale at the time of the First World 
War, when employment in heavy industry spurred the growth of the game, much as 
it had done for men fifty years earlier. The most successful team of the era was 
Dick, Kerr's Ladies of Preston, England. The team played in the first women's 
international matches in 1920, against a team from Paris, France, in April, and 
also made up most of the England team against a Scottish Ladies XI in 1920, and 
winning 22-0.[53] 

Despite being more popular than some men's football events (one match saw a 
53,000 strong crowd),[59] women's football in England suffered a blow in 1921 
when The Football Association outlawed the playing of the game on Association 
members' pitches, on the grounds that the game (as played by women) was 
distasteful.[60] Some speculated that this may have also been due to envy of the 
large crowds that women's matches attracted.[61] This led to the formation of 
the English Ladies Football Association and play moved to rugby grounds.[62] 

Association football has been played by women since at least the time of the 
first recorded women's games in the late 19th century.[63][64] It has 
traditionally been associated with charity games and physical exercise, 
particularly in the United Kingdom.[64] In the late 1960s and early 1970s 
women's association football was organised in the United Kingdom, eventually 
becoming the most prominent team sport for British women.[64] 

20th and 21st century

The growth in women's football has seen major competitions being launched at 
both national and international level mirroring the male competitions. Women's 
football has faced many struggles. It had a "golden age" in the United Kingdom 
in the early 1920s when crowds reached 50,000 at some matches;[65] this was 
stopped on 5 December 1921 when England's Football Association voted to ban the 
game from grounds used by its member clubs. The FA's ban was rescinded in 
December 1969 with UEFA voting to officially recognise women's football in 
1971.[64] The FIFA Women's World Cup was inaugurated in 1991 and has been held 
every four years since,[66] while women's football has been an Olympic event 
since 1996. 

Gameplay


 


A goalkeeper saving a close-range shot from inside the penalty area
Association football is played in accordance with a set of rules known as the 
Laws of the Game. The game is played using a spherical ball of 68–70 cm (27–28 
in) circumference,[67] known as the football (or soccer ball). Two teams of 
eleven players each compete to get the ball into the other team's goal (between 
the posts and under the bar), thereby scoring a goal. The team that has scored 
more goals at the end of the game is the winner; if both teams have scored an 
equal number of goals then the game is a draw. Each team is led by a captain who 
has only one official responsibility as mandated by the Laws of the Game: to 
represent his or her team in the coin toss prior to kick-off or penalty 
kicks.[68] 

The primary law is that players other than goalkeepers may not deliberately 
handle the ball with their hands or arms during play, though they must use both 
their hands during a throw-in restart. Although players usually use their feet 
to move the ball around they may use any part of their body (notably, "heading" 
with the forehead)[69] other than their hands or arms.[70] Within normal play, 
all players are free to play the ball in any direction and move throughout the 
pitch, though the ball cannot be received in an offside position.[71] 


 


A player executing a slide tackle to dispossess an opponent
During gameplay, players attempt to create goal-scoring opportunities through 
individual control of the ball, such as by dribbling, passing the ball to a 
teammate, and by taking shots at the goal, which is guarded by the opposing 
goalkeeper. Opposing players may try to regain control of the ball by 
intercepting a pass or through tackling the opponent in possession of the ball; 
however, physical contact between opponents is restricted. Football is generally 
a free-flowing game, with play stopping only when the ball has left the field of 
play or when play is stopped by the referee for an infringement of the rules. 
After a stoppage, play recommences with a specified restart.[72] 

At a professional level, most matches produce only a few goals. For example, the 
2005–06 season of the English Premier League produced an average of 2.48 goals 
per match.[73] The Laws of the Game do not specify any player positions other 
than goalkeeper,[74] but a number of specialised roles have evolved. Broadly, 
these include three main categories: strikers, or forwards, whose main task is 
to score goals; defenders, who specialise in preventing their opponents from 
scoring; and midfielders, who dispossess the opposition and keep possession of 
the ball to pass it to the forwards on their team. Players in these positions 
are referred to as outfield players, to distinguish them from the goalkeeper. 
These positions are further subdivided according to the area of the field in 
which the player spends most time. For example, there are central defenders, and 
left and right midfielders. The ten outfield players may be arranged in any 
combination. The number of players in each position determines the style of the 
team's play; more forwards and fewer defenders creates a more aggressive and 
offensive-minded game, while the reverse creates a slower, more defensive style 
of play. While players typically spend most of the game in a specific position, 
there are few restrictions on player movement, and players can switch positions 
at any time.[75] The layout of a team's players is known as a formation. 
Defining the team's formation and tactics is usually the prerogative of the 
team's manager.[76] 

Laws

"Rules of football" redirects here. For the rules of other football games, see 
Football.

Main article: Laws of the Game (association football)

There are 17 laws in the official Laws of the Game, each containing a collection 
of stipulation and guidelines. The same laws are designed to apply to all levels 
of football, although certain modifications for groups such as juniors, seniors, 
women and people with physical disabilities are permitted. The laws are often 
framed in broad terms, which allow flexibility in their application depending on 
the nature of the game. The Laws of the Game are published by FIFA, but are 
maintained by the International Football Association Board (IFAB).[77] In 
addition to the seventeen laws, numerous IFAB decisions and other directives 
contribute to the regulation of football. 

Players, equipment, and officials

See also: Association football positions, Formation (association football), and 
Kit (association football)


 


The referee officiates in a football match
Each team consists of a maximum of eleven players (excluding substitutes), one 
of whom must be the goalkeeper. Competition rules may state a minimum number of 
players required to constitute a team, which is usually seven. Goalkeepers are 
the only players allowed to play the ball with their hands or arms, provided 
they do so within the penalty area in front of their own goal. Though there are 
a variety of positions in which the outfield (non-goalkeeper) players are 
strategically placed by a coach, these positions are not defined or required by 
the Laws.[74] 

The basic equipment or kit players are required to wear includes a shirt, 
shorts, socks, footwear and adequate shin guards. An athletic supporter and 
protective cup is highly recommended for male players by medical experts and 
professionals.[78][79] Headgear is not a required piece of basic equipment, but 
players today may choose to wear it to protect themselves from head injury.[80] 
Players are forbidden to wear or use anything that is dangerous to themselves or 
another player, such as jewellery or watches. The goalkeeper must wear clothing 
that is easily distinguishable from that worn by the other players and the match 
officials.[81] 

A number of players may be replaced by substitutes during the course of the 
game. The maximum number of substitutions permitted in most competitive 
international and domestic league games is three in ninety minutes with each 
team being allowed one more if the game should go into extra-time, though the 
permitted number may vary in other competitions or in friendly matches. Common 
reasons for a substitution include injury, tiredness, ineffectiveness, a 
tactical switch, or timewasting at the end of a finely poised game. In standard 
adult matches, a player who has been substituted may not take further part in a 
match.[82] IFAB recommends "that a match should not continue if there are fewer 
than seven players in either team." Any decision regarding points awarded for 
abandoned games is left to the individual football associations.[83] 

 A game is officiated by a referee, who has "full authority to enforce the Laws 
of the Game in connection with the match to which he has been appointed" (Law 
5), and whose decisions are final. The referee is assisted by two assistant 
referees. In many high-level games there is also a fourth official who assists 
the referee and may replace another official should the need arise.[84] 

Goal line technology is used to measure if the whole ball has crossed the 
goal-line thereby determining if a goal has or hasn't been scored, this was 
brought in to prevent there being controversy. Video assistant referee (VAR) has 
also been increasingly introduced to assist officials through video replay to 
correct clear and obvious mistakes. There are four types of calls that can be 
reviewed: mistaken identity in awarding a red or yellow card, goals and whether 
there was a violation during the buildup, direct red card decisions, and penalty 
decisions.[85] 

Ball

Main article: Ball (association football)

The ball is spherical with a circumference of between 68 and 70 centimetres (27 
and 28 in), a weight in the range of 410 to 450 grams (14 to 16 oz), and a 
pressure between 0.6 and 1.1 bars (8.5 and 15.6 pounds per square inch) at sea 
level. In the past the ball was made up of leather panels sewn together, with a 
latex bladder for pressurisation but modern balls at all levels of the game are 
now synthetic.[86][87] 

Pitch

Main article: Football pitch


 


Standard pitch measurements (See Imperial version)
As the Laws were formulated in England, and were initially administered solely 
by the four British football associations within IFAB, the standard dimensions 
of a football pitch were originally expressed in imperial units. The Laws now 
express dimensions with approximate metric equivalents (followed by traditional 
units in brackets), though use of imperial units remains popular in 
English-speaking countries with a relatively recent history of metrication (or 
only partial metrication), such as Britain.[88] 

The length of the pitch, or field, for international adult matches is in the 
range of 100–110 m (110–120 yd) and the width is in the range of 64–75 m (70–80 
yd). Fields for non-international matches may be 90–120 m (100–130 yd) length 
and 45–90 m (50–100 yd) in width, provided that the pitch does not become 
square. In 2008, the IFAB initially approved a fixed size of 105 m (344 ft) long 
and 68 m (223 ft) wide as a standard pitch dimension for international 
matches;[89] however, this decision was later put on hold and was never actually 
implemented.[90] 

The longer boundary lines are touchlines, while the shorter boundaries (on which 
the goals are placed) are goal lines. A rectangular goal is positioned at the 
middle of each goal line.[91] The inner edges of the vertical goal posts must be 
24 feet (7.3 m) apart, and the lower edge of the horizontal crossbar supported 
by the goal posts must be 8 feet (2.4 m) above the ground. Nets are usually 
placed behind the goal, but are not required by the Laws.[92] 

In front of the goal is the penalty area. This area is marked by the goal line, 
two lines starting on the goal line 16.5 m (18 yd) from the goalposts and 
extending 16.5 m (18 yd) into the pitch perpendicular to the goal line, and a 
line joining them. This area has a number of functions, the most prominent being 
to mark where the goalkeeper may handle the ball and where a penalty foul by a 
member of the defending team becomes punishable by a penalty kick. Other 
markings define the position of the ball or players at kick-offs, goal kicks, 
penalty kicks and corner kicks.[93] 

Duration and tie-breaking methods

A standard adult football match consists of two halves of 45 minutes each. Each 
half runs continuously, meaning that the clock is not stopped when the ball is 
out of play. There is usually a 15-minute half-time break between halves. The 
end of the match is known as full-time.[94] The referee is the official 
timekeeper for the match, and may make an allowance for time lost through 
substitutions, injured players requiring attention, or other stoppages. This 
added time is called additional time in FIFA documents,[95][96] but is most 
commonly referred to as stoppage time or injury time, while lost time can also 
be used as a synonym. The duration of stoppage time is at the sole discretion of 
the referee. Stoppage time does not fully compensate for the time in which the 
ball is out of play, and a 90-minute game typically involves about an hour of 
"effective playing time".[97] The referee alone signals the end of the match. In 
matches where a fourth official is appointed, towards the end of the half the 
referee signals how many minutes of stoppage time he intends to add. The fourth 
official then informs the players and spectators by holding up a board showing 
this number. The signalled stoppage time may be further extended by the 
referee.[94] Added time was introduced because of an incident which happened in 
1891 during a match between Stoke and Aston Villa. Trailing 1–0 and with just 
two minutes remaining, Stoke were awarded a penalty. Villa's goalkeeper kicked 
the ball out of the ground, and by the time the ball had been recovered, the 90 
minutes had elapsed and the game was over.[98] The same law also states that the 
duration of either half is extended until the penalty kick to be taken or 
retaken is completed, thus no game shall end with a penalty to be taken.[99] 


 


Some football competitions use a penalty shootout to decide the winner if a 
match ends as a draw
In league competitions, games may end in a draw. In knockout competitions where 
a winner is required various methods may be employed to break such a deadlock; 
some competitions may invoke replays.[100] A game tied at the end of regulation 
time may go into extra time, which consists of two further 15-minute periods. If 
the score is still tied after extra time, some competitions allow the use of 
penalty shootouts (known officially in the Laws of the Game as "kicks from the 
penalty mark") to determine which team will progress to the next stage of the 
tournament. Goals scored during extra time periods count towards the final score 
of the game, but kicks from the penalty mark are only used to decide the team 
that progresses to the next part of the tournament (with goals scored in a 
penalty shootout not making up part of the final score).[68] 

In competitions using two-legged matches, each team competes at home once, with 
an aggregate score from the two matches deciding which team progresses. Where 
aggregates are equal, the away goals rule may be used to determine the winners, 
in which case the winner is the team that scored the most goals in the leg they 
played away from home. If the result is still equal, extra time and potentially 
a penalty shootout are required.[68] 

In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the IFAB experimented with ways of creating a 
winner without requiring a penalty shootout, which was often seen as an 
undesirable way to end a match. These involved rules ending a game in extra time 
early, either when the first goal in extra time was scored (golden goal), or if 
one team held a lead at the end of the first period of extra time (silver goal). 
Golden goal was used at the World Cup in 1998 and 2002. The first World Cup game 
decided by a golden goal was France's victory over Paraguay in 1998. Germany was 
the first nation to score a golden goal in a major competition, beating Czech 
Republic in the final of Euro 1996. Silver goal was used in Euro 2004. Both 
these experiments have been discontinued by IFAB.[101] 

Ball in and out of play

Main article: Ball in and out of play

Under the Laws, the two basic states of play during a game are ball in play and 
ball out of play. From the beginning of each playing period with a kick-off 
until the end of the playing period, the ball is in play at all times, except 
when either the ball leaves the field of play, or play is stopped by the 
referee. When the ball becomes out of play, play is restarted by one of eight 
restart methods depending on how it went out of play: 


 


A player takes a free kick, while the opposition form a "wall" to try to block 
the ballKick-off: following a goal by the opposing team, or to begin each 
  period of play.[72]
  Throw-in: when the ball has crossed the touchline; awarded to the opposing 
  team to that which last touched the ball.[102]
  Goal kick: when the ball has wholly crossed the goal line without a goal 
  having been scored and having last been touched by a player of the attacking 
  team; awarded to defending team.[103]
  Corner kick: when the ball has wholly crossed the goal line without a goal 
  having been scored and having last been touched by a player of the defending 
  team; awarded to attacking team.[104]
  Indirect free kick: awarded to the opposing team following "non-penal" fouls, 
  certain technical infringements, or when play is stopped to caution or dismiss 
  an opponent without a specific foul having occurred. A goal may not be scored 
  directly (without the ball first touching another player) from an indirect 
  free kick.[105]
  Direct free kick: awarded to fouled team following certain listed "penal" 
  fouls.[105] A goal may be scored directly from a direct free kick.
  Penalty kick: awarded to the fouled team following a foul usually punishable 
  by a direct free kick but that has occurred within their opponent's penalty 
  area.[106]
  Dropped-ball: occurs when the referee has stopped play for any other reason, 
  such as a serious injury to a player, interference by an external party, or a 
  ball becoming defective.[72]

Misconduct

Main article: Foul (association football)

On-field










Players are cautioned with a yellow card, and dismissed from the game with a red 
card. These colours were first introduced at the 1970 FIFA World Cup and used 
consistently since.

A foul occurs when a player commits an offence listed in the Laws of the Game 
while the ball is in play. The offences that constitute a foul are listed in Law 
12. Handling the ball deliberately, tripping an opponent, or pushing an 
opponent, are examples of "penal fouls", punishable by a direct free kick or 
penalty kick depending on where the offence occurred. Other fouls are punishable 
by an indirect free kick.[70] 

The referee may punish a player's or substitute's misconduct by a caution 
(yellow card) or dismissal (red card). A second yellow card in the same game 
leads to a red card, which results in a dismissal. A player given a yellow card 
is said to have been "booked", the referee writing the player's name in his 
official notebook. If a player has been dismissed, no substitute can be brought 
on in their place and the player may not participate in further play. Misconduct 
may occur at any time, and while the offences that constitute misconduct are 
listed, the definitions are broad. In particular, the offence of "unsporting 
behaviour" may be used to deal with most events that violate the spirit of the 
game, even if they are not listed as specific offences. A referee can show a 
yellow or red card to a player, substitute or substituted player. Non-players 
such as managers and support staff cannot be shown the yellow or red card, but 
may be expelled from the technical area if they fail to conduct themselves in a 
responsible manner.[70] 

Rather than stopping play, the referee may allow play to continue if doing so 
will benefit the team against which an offence has been committed. This is known 
as "playing an advantage".[107] The referee may "call back" play and penalise 
the original offence if the anticipated advantage does not ensue within "a few 
seconds". Even if an offence is not penalised due to advantage being played, the 
offender may still be sanctioned for misconduct at the next stoppage of 
play.[108] 

The referee's decision in all on-pitch matters is considered final.[109] The 
score of a match cannot be altered after the game, even if later evidence shows 
that decisions (including awards/non-awards of goals) were incorrect. 

Off-field

See also: Foul (association football) § Post-match

Along with the general administration of the sport, football associations and 
competition organisers also enforce good conduct in wider aspects of the game, 
dealing with issues such as comments to the press, clubs' financial management, 
doping, age fraud and match fixing. Most competitions enforce mandatory 
suspensions for players who are sent off in a game.[110] Some on-field 
incidents, if considered very serious (such as allegations of racial abuse), may 
result in competitions deciding to impose heavier sanctions than those normally 
associated with a red card.[b] Some associations allow for appeals against 
player suspensions incurred on-field if clubs feel a referee was incorrect or 
unduly harsh.[110] 

Sanctions for such infractions may be levied on individuals or on to clubs as a 
whole. Penalties may include fines, points deductions (in league competitions) 
or even expulsion from competitions. For example, the English Football League d
educt 12 points from any team that enters financial administration.[111] Among 
other administrative sanctions are penalties against game forfeiture. Teams that 
had forfeited a game or had been forfeited against would be awarded a technical 
loss or win. 

Governing bodies

See also: Association football around the world


 


Headquarters of FIFA, the world governing body of football
The recognised international governing body of football (and associated games, 
such as futsal and beach soccer) is FIFA. The FIFA headquarters are located in 
Zürich, Switzerland. Six regional confederations are associated with FIFA; these 
are:[112] 
  Asia: Asian Football Confederation (AFC)
  Africa: Confederation of African Football (CAF)
  Europe: Union of European Football Associations (UEFA)
  North/Central America & Caribbean: Confederation of North, Central American 
  and Caribbean Association Football (CONCACAF)
  Oceania: Oceania Football Confederation (OFC)
  South America: Confederación Sudamericana de Fútbol/Confederação Sul-americana 
  de Futebol (South American Football Confederation; CONMEBOL)

National associations oversee football within individual countries. These are 
generally synonymous with sovereign states, (for example: the Fédération 
Camerounaise de Football in Cameroon) but also include a smaller number of 
associations responsible for sub-national entities or autonomous regions (for 
example the Scottish Football Association in Scotland). 209 national 
associations are affiliated both with FIFA and with their respective continental 
confederations.[112] 

While FIFA is responsible for arranging competitions and most rules related to 
international competition, the actual Laws of the Game are set by the 
International Football Association Board, where each of the UK Associations has 
one vote, while FIFA collectively has four votes.[40] 

International competitions

Main article: List of association football competitions


 


The FIFA World Cup is the largest international competition in association 
football
The major international competition in football is the World Cup, organised by 
FIFA. This competition takes place every four years since 1930 with the 
exception of 1942 and 1946 tournaments, which were cancelled due to World War 
II. Approximately 190–200 national teams compete in qualifying tournaments 
within the scope of continental confederations for a place in the finals. The 
finals tournament, which is held every four years, involves 32 national teams 
competing over a four-week period.[c] The World Cup is the most prestigious 
association football tournament in the world as well as the most widely viewed 
and followed sporting event in the world, exceeding even the Olympic Games; the 
cumulative audience of all matches of the 2006 FIFA World Cup was estimated to 
be 26.29 billion with an estimated 715.1 million people watching the final 
match, a ninth of the entire population of the planet.[113][114][115][116] The 
current champion is France, which won its second title at the 2018 tournament in 
Russia. FIFA Women's World Cup has been held every four years since 1991. Under 
the tournament's current format, national teams vie for 23 slots in a three-year 
qualification phase. (The host nation's team is automatically entered as the 
24th slot.) The current champion is the United States, after winning their third 
title in the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup. 

There has been a football tournament at every Summer Olympic Games since 1900, 
except at the 1932 games in Los Angeles.[117] Before the inception of the World 
Cup, the Olympics (especially during the 1920s) were the most prestigious 
international event. Originally, the tournament was for amateurs only.[39] As 
professionalism spread around the world, the gap in quality between the World 
Cup and the Olympics widened. The countries that benefited most were the Soviet 
Bloc countries of Eastern Europe, where top athletes were state-sponsored while 
retaining their status as amateurs. Between 1948 and 1980, 23 out of 27 Olympic 
medals were won by Eastern Europe, with only Sweden (gold in 1948 and bronze in 
1952), Denmark (bronze in 1948 and silver in 1960) and Japan (bronze in 1968) 
breaking their dominance. For the 1984 Los Angeles Games, the IOC decided to 
admit professional players. FIFA still did not want the Olympics to rival the 
World Cup, so a compromise was struck that allowed teams from Africa, Asia, 
Oceania and CONCACAF to field their strongest professional sides, while 
restricting UEFA and CONMEBOL teams to players who had not played in a World 
Cup. Since 1992 male competitors must be under 23 years old, and since 1996, 
players under 23 years old, with three over-23 year old players, are allowed per 
squad. A women's tournament was added in 1996; in contrast to the men's event, 
full international sides without age restrictions play the women's Olympic 
tournament.[118] 


 


Spanish footballers celebrating winning the UEFA European Championship
After the World Cup, the most important international football competitions are 
the continental championships, which are organised by each continental 
confederation and contested between national teams. These are the European 
Championship (UEFA), the Copa América (CONMEBOL), African Cup of Nations (CAF), 
the Asian Cup (AFC), the CONCACAF Gold Cup (CONCACAF) and the OFC Nations Cup 
(OFC). The FIFA Confederations Cup is contested by the winners of all six 
continental championships, the current FIFA World Cup champions and the country 
which is hosting the Confederations Cup. This is generally regarded as a warm-up 
tournament for the upcoming FIFA World Cup and does not carry the same prestige 
as the World Cup itself. The most prestigious competitions in club football are 
the respective continental championships, which are generally contested between 
national champions, for example the UEFA Champions League in Europe and the Copa 
Libertadores in South America. The winners of each continental competition 
contest the FIFA Club World Cup.[119] 

Domestic competitions

Main articles: Geography of association football and Geography of women's 
association football


 


A 2011 Spanish La Liga match between Real Madrid and Barcelona. This fixture, 
known as El Clásico, is one of the most renowned in sport.[120]
The governing bodies in each country operate league systems in a domestic 
season, normally comprising several divisions, in which the teams gain points 
throughout the season depending on results. Teams are placed into tables, 
placing them in order according to points accrued. Most commonly, each team 
plays every other team in its league at home and away in each season, in a 
round-robin tournament. At the end of a season, the top team is declared the 
champion. The top few teams may be promoted to a higher division, and one or 
more of the teams finishing at the bottom are relegated to a lower 
division.[121] 

The teams finishing at the top of a country's league may be eligible also to 
play in international club competitions in the following season. The main 
exceptions to this system occur in some Latin American leagues, which divide 
football championships into two sections named Apertura and Clausura (Spanish 
for Opening and Closing), awarding a champion for each.[122] The majority of 
countries supplement the league system with one or more "cup" competitions 
organised on a knock-out basis. 

Some countries' top divisions feature highly paid star players; in smaller 
countries, lower divisions, and most of women's clubs, players may be 
part-timers with a second job, or amateurs. The five top European leagues – the 
Bundesliga (Germany), Premier League (England),[123] La Liga (Spain), Serie A 
(Italy), and Ligue 1 (France) – attract most of the world's best players and 
each of the leagues has a total wage cost in excess of £600 million/€763 
million/US$1.185 billion.[124] 

Hooliganism

Main article: Football hooliganism

Football hooliganism is the term used to describe disorderly, violent or 
destructive behaviour perpetrated by spectators at football events.[125][126] 

Variants and casual play

See also: Variants of association football and Street football




Play media



To many, football is more than just a sport: a video short on the many styles 
and ethnicities who play football.
Variants of football have been codified for reduced-sized teams (i.e. 
five-a-side football) play in non-field environments (i.e. beach soccer, indoor 
soccer, and futsal) and for teams with disabilities (i.e. paralympic association 
football). 

Casual games can be played with only minimal equipment – a basic game can be 
played on almost any open area of reasonable size with just a ball and items to 
mark the positions of two sets of goalposts. Such games can have team sizes that 
vary from eleven-a-side, can use a limited or modified subset of the official 
rules, and can be self-officiated by the players. 

See also
   Association football portal
   Women's association football portal
  Association football culture
  Association football tactics and skills
  List of association football clubs
  List of association football stadiums by country
  List of men's national association football teams
  List of women's national association football teams
  List of top association football goal scorers
  List of women's association football clubs
  Lists of association football players

Notes

  Jump up ^ See Names for association football 
  Jump up ^ For example, the English Premier League fined and levied an 8-match 
  suspension on Luis Suárez for racially abusing Patrice Evra 
  Jump up ^ The number of competing teams has varied over the history of the 
  competition. The most recent changed was in 1998, from 24 to 32. 

References


  Jump up ^ "In a globalised world, the football World Cup is a force for good". 
  The Conversation. 10 July 2014. Retrieved 11 July 2014..mw-parser-output 
  cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output 
  q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output 
  code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-outputo
  .cs1-lock-free 
  a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/Lock-green.svg/9px-Lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:righto
  .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output 
  .cs1-lock-registration 
  a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:rightr
  .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-lock-subscription 
  a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:righte
  .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output 
  .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription 
  span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px 
  dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output 
  .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output 
  .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output 
  .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output 
  .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output 
  .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output 
  .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em} 
  Jump up ^ "History of Football - Britain, the home of Football". FIFA. 
  Jump up ^ Post Publishing PCL. "Bangkok Post article". Bangkok Post. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b "History of Football - The Origins". FIFA. Retrieved 29 
  April 2013. 
  Jump up ^ "Overview of Football". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the 
  original on 12 June 2008. Retrieved 4 June 2008. 
  Jump up ^ Guttman, Allen (1993). "The Diffusion of Sports and the Problem of 
  Cultural Imperialism". In Dunning, Eric; Maguire, Joseph A.; Pearton, Robert 
  E. The Sports Process: A Comparative and Developmental Approach. Champaign: 
  Human Kinetics. p. 129. ISBN 0-88011-624-2. the game is complex enough not to 
  be invented independently by many preliterate cultures and yet simple enough 
  to become the world's most popular team sport 
  Jump up ^ Dunning, Eric (1999). "The development of soccer as a world game". 
  Sport Matters: Sociological Studies of Sport, Violence and Civilisation. 
  London: Routledge. p. 103. ISBN 0-415-06413-9. During the twentieth century, 
  soccer emerged as the world's most popular team sport 
  Jump up ^ Mueller, Frederick; Cantu, Robert; Van Camp, Steven (1996). "Team 
  Sports". Catastrophic Injuries in High School and College Sports. Champaign: 
  Human Kinetics. p. 57. ISBN 0-87322-674-7. Soccer is the most popular sport in 
  the world and is an industry worth over US$400 billion world wide. 80% of this 
  is generated in Europe, though its popularity is growing in the United States. 
  It has been estimated that there were 22 million soccer players in the world 
  in the early 1980s, and that number is increasing. In the United States soccer 
  is now a major sport at both the high school and college levels 
  Jump up ^ "2002 FIFA World Cup TV Coverage". FIFA. 5 December 2006. Archived 
  from the original on 14 March 2005. Retrieved 6 January 2008. 
  Jump up ^ "Octavian - Robbins Library Digital Projects". 
  Jump up ^ "Online Etymology Dictionary". 1 January 2017. Retrieved 29 October 
  2018. 
  Jump up ^ "What's the origin of the word "soccer"?". 
  Jump up ^ "soccer | Origin and meaning of soccer by Online Etymology 
  Dictionary". www.etymonline.com. Retrieved 29 October 2018. 
  Jump up ^ "Soccer to become football in Australia". The Sydney Morning Herald. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b Item (NAMA) 873 Archived 22 July 2016 at the Wayback 
  Machine. displayed at the National Archaeological Museum, Athens. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b c Murray, Scott (30 March 2010). Football For Dummies. John 
  Wiley & Sons. pp. 33–. ISBN 978-0-470-66440-7. 
  Jump up ^ "FIFAClassicFootball". FIFA. Retrieved 20 June 2014. 
  Jump up ^ "Classic Football History of the Game". FIFA. Retrieved 17 September 
  2013. 
  Jump up ^ "A gripping Greek derby". FIFA. Retrieved 17 September 2013. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b "Fury as FIFA finds a field of dreams in China". Bangkok 
  Post. 5 June 2014. 
  Jump up ^ Nigel Wilson, Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece, Routledge, 2005, p. 
  310 
  Jump up ^ Nigel M. Kennell, The Gymnasium of Virtue: Education and Culture in 
  Ancient Sparta (Studies in the History of Greece and Rome), The University of 
  North Carolina Press, 1995, on Google Books 
  Jump up ^ Steve Craig, Sports and Games of the Ancients: (Sports and Games 
  Through History), Greenwood, 2002, on Google Books 
  Jump up ^ Don Nardo, Greek and Roman Sport, Greenhaven Press, 1999, p. 83 
  Jump up ^ Sally E. D. Wilkins, Sports and games of medieval cultures, 
  Greenwood, 2002, on Google books 
  Jump up ^ "Rugby Football History". Rugby Football History. Retrieved 19 June 
  2014. 
  Jump up ^ "Classic Football History of the Game". FIFA. Retrieved 17 September 
  2013. 
  Jump up ^ "History of Football – The Origins". FIFA. Retrieved 15 December 
  2017. 
  Jump up ^ Chadwick, Simon; Hamil, Sean, eds. (2010). Managing Football: An 
  International Perspective. London: Routledge. p. 458. ISBN 978-1-136-43763-2. 
  Jump up ^ "Classic Football History of the Game". FIFA. 10 June 2014. 
  Retrieved 19 June 2014. 
  Jump up ^ "History of Football – Britain, the home of Football". FIFA. 
  Archived from the original on 1 July 2007. Retrieved 20 November 2006. 
  Jump up ^ Harvey, Adrian (2005). Football, the first hundred years. London: 
  Routledge. p. 126. ISBN 0-415-35018-2. 
  Jump up ^ Winner, David (28 March 2005). "The hands-off approach to a man's 
  game". The Times. London. Retrieved 7 October 2007. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b "History of the FA". Football Association (FA). Retrieved 9 
  October 2007. 
  Jump up ^ Young, Percy M. (1964). Football in Sheffield. S. Paul. pp. 28–29. 
  Jump up ^ "The History of the Football League". The Football League. 22 
  September 2010. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011. Retrieved 4 March 
  2011. 
  Jump up ^ "IFAB". FIFA. Retrieved 10 December 2011. 
  Jump up ^ "The International FA Board". FIFA. Archived from the original on 22 
  April 2007. Retrieved 2 September 2007. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b "Where it all began". FIFA. Archived from the original on 8 
  June 2007. Retrieved 8 June 2007. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b "The IFAB: How it works". FIFA. Retrieved 4 March 2011. 
  Jump up ^ Ingle, Sean; Glendenning, Barry (9 October 2003). "Baseball or 
  Football: which sport gets the higher attendance?". The Guardian. UK. 
  Retrieved 5 June 2006. 
  Jump up ^ "TV Data". FIFA. Archived from the original on 22 September 2007. 
  Retrieved 2 September 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "2014 FIFA World Cup™ reached 3.2 billion viewers, one billion 
  watched final". FIFA. 16 December 2015. Retrieved 17 March 2017. 
  Jump up ^ "FIFA Survey: approximately 250 million footballers worldwide" 
  (PDF). FIFA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 September 2006. Retrieved 
  15 September 2006. 
  Jump up ^ "2006 FIFA World Cup broadcast wider, longer and farther than ever 
  before". FIFA. 6 February 2007. Retrieved 11 October 2009. 
  Jump up ^ Kapuscinski, Ryszard (2007). The Soccer War. 
  Jump up ^ Stormer, Neil (20 June 2006). "More than a game". Common Ground News 
  Service. Archived from the original on 26 June 2010. Retrieved 2 March 2010. 
  Jump up ^ Austin, Merrill (10 July 2007). "Best Feet Forward". Vanity Fair. 
  Archived from the original on 28 February 2010. Retrieved 2 March 2010. 
  Jump up ^ Dart, James; Bandini, Paolo (21 February 2007). "Has football ever 
  started a war?". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 29 
  October 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007. 
  Jump up ^ Drezner, Daniel (4 June 2006). "The Soccer Wars". The Washington 
  Post. p. B01. Retrieved 21 May 2008. 
  Jump up ^ "Genesis of the Global Game". The Global Game. Archived from the 
  original on 21 May 2006. Retrieved 22 May 2006. 
  Jump up ^ "The Chinese and Tsu Chu". The Football Network. Retrieved 1 May 
  2006. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b "A Brief History of Women's Football". Scottish Football 
  Association. Archived from the original on 8 March 2005. Retrieved 18 November 
  2013. 
  Jump up ^ "A game of two sexes". The Herald. Glasgow. 8 February 1997. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b "Women's Football History". The Football Association. 
  Archived from the original on 25 March 2009. 
  Jump up ^ "How women's football battled for survival". BBC. 3 June 2005. 
  Jump up ^ "Women's involvement with soccer was part of the emancipation 
  process". SoccerTimes. Archived from the original on 16 November 2006. 
  Retrieved 4 May 2006. 
  Jump up ^ Mårtensson, Stefan (June 2010). "Branding women's football in a 
  field of hegemonic masculinity". Entertainment and Sports Law Journal. 8. 
  Jump up ^ Leighton, Tony (10 February 2008). "FA apologies for 1921 ban". The 
  Guardian. Retrieved 6 August 2014. 
  Jump up ^ Witzig, Richard (2006). The Global Art of Soccer. CusiBoy 
  Publishing. p. 65. ISBN 0977668800. Retrieved 6 August 2014. 
  Jump up ^ "Trail-blazers who pioneered women's football". BBC. 3 June 2005. 
  Jump up ^ Newsham, Gail (2014). In a League of Their Own. The Dick, Kerr 
  Ladies 1917-1965. Paragon Publishing. 
  Jump up ^ Campbell, Alan (19 October 2012). "No longer the game of 
  two-halves". The Herald. Herald & Times Group. Retrieved 9 March 2014. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b c d Gregory, Patricia (3 June 2005). "How women's football 
  battled for survival". BBC sport. BBC. Retrieved 19 February 2010. 
  Jump up ^ Alexander, Shelley (3 June 2005). "Trail-blazers who pioneered 
  women's football". BBC sport. BBC. Retrieved 19 February 2010. 
  Jump up ^ "Tournaments: Women's World Cup". FIFA. Archived from the original 
  on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 11 March 2011. 
  Jump up ^ Circumference - FIFA Quality Programme Archived 19 November 2016 at 
  the Wayback Machine. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b c "Procedures to determine the winner of a match or 
  home-and-away". Laws of the Game 2010/2011 (PDF). FIFA. pp. 51–52. Retrieved 4 
  March 2011. 
  Jump up ^ "How to head a football". Archived from the original on 15 December 
  2010. Retrieved 3 January 2011. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b c "Laws of the game (Law 12)". FIFA. Archived from the 
  original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "Law 11 – Offside". Laws of the Game 2010/2011 (PDF). FIFA. p. 31. 
  Retrieved 4 March 2011. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b c "Laws of the game (Law 8)". FIFA. Archived from the 
  original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "England Premiership (2005/2006)". Sportpress.com. Archived from the 
  original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 5 June 2007. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b "Laws of the game (Law 3–Number of Players)". FIFA. Archived 
  from the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "Positions guide, Who is in a team?". BBC Sport. 1 September 2005. 
  Archived from the original on 5 November 2006. Retrieved 24 September 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "Formations". BBC Sport. 1 September 2005. Archived from the 
  original on 25 August 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "Laws of the Game". FIFA. Archived from the original on 1 September 
  2007. Retrieved 2 September 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "Health Advice for Boys". Strikingeagles.tripod.com. Retrieved 24 
  September 2013. 
  Jump up ^ "Soccer Position Paper" (PDF). Retrieved 24 September 2013. 
  Jump up ^ "Football's biggest headache". Marca. Spain. 12 March 2017. 
  Retrieved 17 May 2018. 
  Jump up ^ "Laws of the game (Law 4–Players' Equipment)". FIFA. Archived from 
  the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "Laws of the game (Law 3–Substitution procedure)". FIFA. Archived 
  from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "Law 3 – The Number of Players". Laws of the Game 2010/2011 (PDF). 
  FIFA. p. 62. Retrieved 4 March 2011. 
  Jump up ^ "Laws of the game (Law 5–The referee)". FIFA. Archived from the 
  original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "Video Assistant Referees (VARs) Experiment – Protocol (Summary)" 
  (PDF). International Football Association Board. 26 April 2017. Retrieved 26 
  April 2017. 
  Jump up ^ "Laws of the Game 2013/2014" (PDF). FIFA. 
  Jump up ^ "Football manufacturing". FIFA quality program. FIFA. Archived from 
  the original on 4 September 2016. Retrieved 3 July 2014. 
  Jump up ^ Summers, Chris (2 September 2004). "Will we ever go completely 
  metric?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 October 2007. Retrieved 7 
  October 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "Goal-line technology put on ice". FIFA. 8 March 2008. Retrieved 19 
  June 2010. 
  Jump up ^ "FIFA Amendments to the Laws of the Game, 2008" (PDF). FIFA. 
  Retrieved 4 March 2011. 
  Jump up ^ "Laws of the game (Law 1.1–The field of play)". FIFA. Archived from 
  the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "Laws of the game (Law 1.4–The Field of play)". FIFA. Archived from 
  the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "Laws of the game (Law 1.3–The field of play)". FIFA. Archived from 
  the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b "Laws of the game (Law 7.2–The duration of the match)". 
  FIFA. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 24 September 
  2007. 
  Jump up ^ "Interpretation of the Laws of the Game – Law 07" (PDF). FIFA. 
  Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 July 2012. 
  Jump up ^ "Law 7 - The Duration of the Match" (PDF). FIFA. 
  Jump up ^ "Football reforms: Scrapping 45-minute half to be debated at Ifab". 
  BBC Sport. 18 June 2017. Retrieved 7 March 2018. 
  Jump up ^ The Sunday Times Illustrated History of Football Reed International 
  Books Limited 1996. p.11 ISBN 1-85613-341-9 
  Jump up ^ "Laws of the game (Law 7.3–The duration of the match)". FIFA. 
  Archived from the original on 19 October 2007. Retrieved 3 March 2010. 
  Jump up ^ For example in the FA Cup prior to the semi-finals. 
  Jump up ^ Collett, Mike (2 July 2004). "Time running out for silver goal". 
  Rediff.com. Reuters. Archived from the original on 2 November 2007. Retrieved 
  7 October 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "Laws of the game (Law 15–The Throw-in)". FIFA. Archived from the 
  original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 14 October 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "Laws of the game (Law 16–The Goal Kick)". FIFA. Archived from the 
  original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 14 October 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "Laws of the game (Law 17–The Corner Kick)". FIFA. Archived from the 
  original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 14 October 2007. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b "Laws of the game (Law 13–Free Kicks)". FIFA. Archived from 
  the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 14 October 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "Laws of the game (Law 14–The Penalty Kick)". FIFA. Archived from 
  the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 14 October 2007. 
  Jump up ^ "Referee's signals: advantage". BBC Sport. 14 September 2005. 
  Retrieved 4 March 2011. 
  Jump up ^ "Law 5: The Referee: Advantage". Laws of the Game 2010/2011 (PDF). 
  FIFA. p. 66. Retrieved 4 March 2011. 
  Jump up ^ "Law 5: The Referee". The Laws of the Game (PDF). FIFA. p. 24. 
  Retrieved 5 May 2012. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b For example, see The Football Association's rules regarding 
  player suspensions in FA competitions: "DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES". The Football 
  Association. Retrieved 1 February 2016. 
  Jump up ^ "Football League administration penalty raised to 12 points". BBC 
  Sport. 5 June 2015. Retrieved 17 May 2018. 
  ^ Jump up to: a b "Confederations". FIFA. Retrieved 4 March 2011. 
  Jump up ^ "2006 FIFA World Cup broadcast wider, longer and farther than ever 
  before". FIFA. 6 February 2007. Retrieved 11 October 2009. 
  Jump up ^ Tom Dunmore, Historical Dictionary of Soccer, page 235, quote "The 
  World Cup is now the most-watched sporting event in the world on television, 
  above even the Olympic Games." 
  Jump up ^ Stephen Dobson and John Goddard, The Economics of Football, page 
  407, quote "The World Cup is the most widely viewed sporting event in the 
  world: the estimated cumulative television audience for the 2006 World Cup in 
  Germany was 26.2 billion, an average of 409 million viewers per match." 
  Jump up ^ Glenn M. Wong, The Comprehensive Guide to Careers in Sports, page 
  144, quote "The World Cup is the most-watched sporting event in the world. In 
  2006, more than 30 billion viewers in 214 countries watched the World Cup on 
  television, and more than 3.3 million spectators attended the 64 matches of 
  the tournament." 
  Jump up ^ "Football Equipment and History". International Olympic Committee 
  (IOC). Retrieved 4 March 2011. 
  Jump up ^ "Event Guide – Football". sportinglife. 365 media group. Archived 
  from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 5 March 2011. 
  Jump up ^ "Organising Committee strengthens FIFA Club World Cup format". FIFA. 
  14 August 2007. Archived from the original on 31 May 2008. Retrieved 7 October 
  2007. 
  Jump up ^ McMahon, Bobby (21 December 2017). "El Clásico Is A Must-See Game, 
  But Is Its Global Audience Overstated?". Forbes. Retrieved 17 May 2018. 
  Jump up ^ Fort, Rodney (September 2000). "Scottish Journal of Political 
  Economy". Scottish Journal of Political Economy. 47 (4): 431–455. 
  doi:10.1111/1467-9485.00172. 
  Jump up ^ "Estudiantes win Argentina Apertura title". Fox Sports. Associated 
  Press. 13 December 2010. Under the system used in Argentina and most of Latin 
  America, two season titles are awarded each year – the Apertura and Clausura. 
  Jump up ^ Hughes, Ian (31 March 2008). "Premier League conquering Europe". BBC 
  Sport. Retrieved 27 May 2008. 
  Jump up ^ Taylor, Louise (29 May 2008). "Leading clubs losing out as players 
  and agents cash in". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 28 November 2008. 
  Jump up ^ "What is football hooliganism?". BBC News. Retrieved 12 May 2015. 
  Jump up ^ "Another sorry outbreak of the English disease". The Independent. 
  London. 17 June 2004. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. 
  Retrieved 25 July 2007. 

External links


Find more about
Association football
at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary 
  Media from Wikimedia Commons 
  News from Wikinews 
  Quotations from Wikiquote 
  Texts from Wikisource 
  Textbooks from Wikibooks 
  Travel guide from Wikivoyage 
  Learning resources from Wikiversity 


Listen to this article (2 parts) · (info)

Part 1 · Part 2




This audio file was created from a revision of the article "Association 
football" dated 2007-09-05, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the 
article. (Audio help)

More spoken articles
  Federation Internationale de Football Association (FIFA)
  Association football at Curlie



    show
      v
      t
      e


    International association football


      FIFA
       Federations
       Teams
       Competitions
       World Cup U-20
         U-17

       Confederations Cup
       Olympics
       Youth Olympics
       Universiade
       World Rankings
       The Best FIFA Football Awards
       Timeline of association football
       Comparison of association football and futsal


  Africa

      CAF – Africa Cup of Nations U-23
         U-20
         U-17

       Regional (CECAFA, CEMAC, COSAFA, WAFU)
       Intercontinental (UAFA)




  Asia

      AFC – Asian Cup U-23
         U-19
         U-16
         U-14

       Regional (ASEAN, EAFF, SAFF, CAFA, WAFF)
       Intercontinental (UAFA)


  Europe

      UEFA – European Championship U-21
         U-19
         U-17

       Nations League


  North America,
  Central America
  and the Caribbean

      CONCACAF – Gold Cup U-20
         U-17
         U-15

       Nations League
       Regional (CFU, UNCAF)


  Oceania

      OFC – Nations Cup U-19
         U-17



  South America

      CONMEBOL – Copa América U-20
         U-17
         U-15



  Non-FIFA

      NF-Board – Viva World Cup
       CONIFA – ConIFA World Football Cup
       ConIFA European Football Cup
       IIGA – Island Games


  Games

      African Games
       Asian Games
       Central America
       Central America and Caribbean
       East Asian Games
       Francophonie Games
       Indian Ocean Island
       Lusophony Games
       Mediterranean Games
       Pan American Games
       Pan Arab Games
       Pacific Games
       South Asian Games
       Southeast Asian Games
       West Asian Games


      See also Geography Codes Player/Club of the Century Women's football



    show
      v
      t
      e


    Laws of the Game (rules of association football)


  Terms

      Law 1: The Field of Play
       Law 2: The Ball
       Law 3: The Number of Players
       Law 4: The Players' Equipment
       Law 5: The Referee
       Law 6: The Other Match Officials
       Law 7: The Duration of the Match
       Law 8: The Start and Restart of Play
       Law 9: The Ball In and Out of Play
       Law 10: The Method of Scoring
       Law 11: Offside
       Law 12: Fouls and Misconduct
       Law 13: Free kicks (direct and indirect)
       Law 14: The Penalty Kick
       Law 15: The Throw-In
       Law 16: The Goal Kick
       Law 17: The Corner Kick


  Comparisons

      Football and rugby union
       Football and futsal


  IFAB

       The Football Association
        Scottish Football Association
        Football Association of Wales
        Irish Football Association
        FIFA


  Related

      Sheffield Rules




    show
      v
      t
      e


    Association football terminology


  Terms

      Formations
       Laws
       Media
       Positions
       Tactics and skills
       Total Football
       Catenaccio
       Tiki-taka
       Zona mista
       Variants
       Differences between the rules of futsal and association football


  Advanced skills

      Behind the leg flip flap
       Bicycle kick
       Cruyff Turn
       Curl
       Flip flap
       Keepie uppie
       Marseille turn
       Nutmeg
       Panenka
       Pelé runaround move
       Rabona
       Rainbow kick
       Scorpion kick
       Seal dribble
       Step over
       Volley


  Nicknames

      Clubs Americas
         Mainland Europe
         UK

       National teams
       People




    show
      v
      t
      e


    Association football chronology


  Overviews

      Professionalism in association football
       Geography of men's football
       Geography of women's football


  Timelines

      Football
       Brazilian football
       Capeverdean football
       Dutch football
       English football
       French football
       Greek football
       Malian football
       Senegalese football
       Scottish football
       Spanish football
       USA soccer


  History

      Prehistory of football
       History of football
       History of FIFA


  By year

      1820s
       1830s
       1840s
       1850s
       1860s
       1870
       1871
       1872
       1873
       1874
       1875
       1876
       1877
       1878
       1879
       1880
       1881
       1882
       1883
       1884
       1885
       1886
       1887
       1888
       1889
       1890
       1891
       1892
       1893
       1894
       1895
       1896
       1897
       1898
       1899
       1900
       1901
       1902
       1903
       1904
       1905
       1906
       1907
       1908
       1909
       1910
       1911
       1912
       1913
       1914
       1915
       1916
       1917
       1918
       1919
       1920
       1921
       1922
       1923
       1924
       1925
       1926
       1927
       1928
       1929
       1930
       1931
       1932
       1933
       1934
       1935
       1936
       1937
       1938
       1939
       1940
       1941
       1942
       1943
       1944
       1945
       1946
       1947
       1948
       1949
       1950
       1951
       1952
       1953
       1954
       1955
       1956
       1957
       1958
       1959
       1960
       1961
       1962
       1963
       1964
       1965
       1966
       1967
       1968
       1969
       1970
       1971
       1972
       1973
       1974
       1975
       1976
       1977
       1978
       1979
       1980
       1981
       1982
       1983
       1984
       1985
       1986
       1987
       1988
       1989
       1990
       1991
       1992
       1993
       1994
       1995
       1996
       1997
       1998
       1999
       2000
       2001
       2002
       2003
       2004
       2005
       2006
       2007
       2008
       2009
       2010
       2011
       2012
       2013
       2014
       2015
       2016
       2017
       2018




    show
      v
      t
      e


    Fanaticism in association football


  Music, chants and sounds

      Chants
       Songs dedicated to football
       Vuvuzelas
       Viking Thunder Clap


  Organised supporters

      Barra brava
       Curva
       Hooliganism
       Torcida organizada
       Tifosi
       Ultras


  Other articles

      Church of Maradona
       Fireworks in the stands
       Makarapa




    show
      v
      t
      e


    Team sports


      Sport
       Governing bodies
       Sportspeople
       National sport


  Basket sports

      Basketball beach
         deaf
         3x3
         water
         wheelchair

       Cestoball
       Korfball
       Netball Fast5
         indoor
         wheelchair

       Rezball
       Ringball
       Slamball


  Football codes



            Association football amputee
               beach
               freestyle
               Futsal
               indoor
               Jorkyball
               paralympic
               powerchair
               roller
               street
               walking

             Australian rules football AFLX
               Lightning football
               Metro footy
               Nine-a-side
               Rec footy

             Gaelic football Ladies'

             Circle rules football


        Gridiron codes

            American football eight-man
               flag
               nine-man
               six-man
               sprint
               touch
               wheelchair

             Canadian football
             Indoor American football Arena football



        Hybrid codes

            Austus
             Eton wall game
             International rules football
             Samoa rules
             Speedball
             Swedish football
             Universal football
             Volata


        Medieval football codes

            Ba game
             Caid
             Calcio fiorentino
             Camping
             Cnapan
             Cornish hurling
             Cuju
             Harpastum
             Kemari
             Ki-o-rahi
             Jegichagi
             La soule
             Lelo burti
             Marn grook
             Pasuckuakohowog
             Royal Shrovetide
             Uppies and downies
             Yubi lakpi


        Rugby codes

            Beach
             Rugby league masters
               mod
               nines
               sevens
               tag
               wheelchair

             Rugby union American flag
               mini
               sevens
               snow
               tag
               touch
               tens

             Touch
             Wheelchair




  Bat-and-ball games

      Baseball
       Brännboll
       Corkball
       Cricket One Day
         Test
         Twenty20

       Danish longball
       Indoor cricket
       Kickball
       Lapta
       Matball
       Oină
       Over-the-line
       Pesäpallo
       Rounders
       Softball Fastpitch

       Stickball
       Stoolball
       Town ball
       Vigoro
       Vitilla
       Welsh/British baseball
       Wiffle ball
       Wireball


  Stick and ball sports



            Bando
             Cammag
             Hurling Camogie
               Super11s
               Shinty–Hurling

             Indigenous North American stickball
             Iomain
             Knattleikr
             Knotty
             Lacrosse box/indoor
               field
               intercrosse
               women's

             Ritinis
             Shinty Shinty–Hurling



        Hockey sports

            Ball hockey
             Bandy rink

             Broomball Moscow

             Field hockey indoor

             Floor hockey
             Floorball
             Ice hockey pond
               power
               ice sledge
               underwater

             Ringette
             Rinkball
             Roller hockey in-line
               quad

             Rossall hockey
             Shinny
             Street hockey
             Underwater hockey
             Unicycle hockey


        Polo sports

            Auto polo
             Cowboy polo
             Cycle polo
             Elephant polo
             Horseball
             Motoball
             Pato
             Polo Arena polo
               chovgan
               snow polo

             Polocrosse
             Segway polo
             Yak polo




  Net sports

      Ball badminton
       Beach tennis
       Biribol
       Bossaball
       Fistball
       Footbag net
       Football tennis
       Footvolley
       Jianzi
       Jokgu
       Newcomb ball
       Peteca
       Sepak takraw
       Throwball
       Volleyball beach
         paralympic



  Other sports

      Airsoft
       Angleball
       Balle à la main
       Ballon au poing
       Basque pelota frontenis
         jai alai
         xare

       Bo-taoshi
       Boules Bocce
         Bocce volo
         Boccia
         Bowls
         Jeu provençal
         Pétanque
         Raffa

       Buzkashi
       Combat (juggling)
       Curling wheelchair

       Cycle ball
       Digor
       Dodgeball
       Flickerball
       Gateball
       Goalball
       Guts
       Handball beach
         Czech
         field

       Hornussen
       Ice stock sport
       Jereed
       Kabaddi indoor
         beach

       Kho kho
       Kin-Ball
       Lagori
       Longue paume
       Makura-Nage
       Mesoamerican ballgame
       Paintball
       Pelota mixteca
       Prisonball
       Pushball
       Quidditch
       Rollball
       Roller derby
       Slahal
       Snow snake
       Synchronized skating
       Synchronized swimming
       Tamburello
       Tchoukball beach

       Tejo
       Tug of war
       Ulama
       Ultimate
       Underwater football
       Underwater rugby
       Valencian pilota Llargues

       Water polo canoe
         inner tube
         beach

       Waboba
       Whirlyball
       Woodball
       Yukigassen


       Portal





